---
title: "Cities in a Time of Uncertainty"
subtitle: "Food and Canadian Municipal Law"
shorttitle: "Cities in a Time of Uncertainty"
author: Jamie Baxter and Jessica Rose
authors:
    - baxter
    - rose
email: "jamie.baxter@dal.ca"
date: 2019-09-23
tags: [food, cities, municipal law]
abstract: ""
thanks: ""

publication_types: [3]
publication: "Food Law and Policy in Canada, Heather McLeod-Kilmurray, Angela Lee, Nathalie Chalifour, eds (Carswell)"
projects:
  - justfoodgov

numbersections: true
secnumdepth: 2

---

# Introduction

Most people probably think of "local food" as food grown or caught by
local farmers and fishers. But there is another sense in which food
systems in Canada are increasingly "local," as cities and other
municipal entities take on leading roles in governing the food we
produce and eat. A recent study by Rod MacRae and Kendal Donahue on
"municipal food policy entrepreneurs" in Canada found that at least 64
cities and towns across the country are actively engaged in food policy
initiatives that address the environmental, health, economic and social
justice dimensions of food systems.[^1] Cities now regulate key aspects
of food production, processing, consumption and waste, and they are
increasingly major players in purchasing and distributing healthy and
sustainable foods. This domestic trend toward local food governance is
also being reproduced globally, as cities become "key transition spaces
where new food governance systems are being fashioned."[^2] In 2015,
more than 150 cities from around the world signed the Milan Urban Food
Policy Pact, "\[a\]cknowledging that cities ... have a strategic role to
play in developing sustainable food systems and promoting healthy
diets".[^3]

At the same time, cities and municipal food advocates in Canada continue
to express a certain ambivalence about cities' legal authority to govern
food systems. For example, even as they document and emphasize the
active engagement of cities in food issues, MacRae and Donahue reinforce
the idea that "\[m\]unicipalities have limited jurisdictional authority
over the food system."[^4] That ambivalence is also reflected in
municipal practice, where---despite the many important initiatives that
are being planned and undertaken---food governance remains primarily
confined to conventional domains of local power over matters such as
land use planning, business licensing and institutional procurement.

In this chapter we address the tension between, on the one hand, a
growing optimism about municipal governance of food and, on the other, a
persistent pessimism about the scope of cities' legal authority to
actually pursue these commitments. Despite the well-deserved excitement
around the work of local food policy councils[^5] and the development of
municipal food strategies,[^6] most participants and observers appear
firmly committed to the idea that local governments are "entirely
creatures of provincial statutes,"[^7] whose attempts to govern beyond
their traditionally narrow roles will be "firmly repelled by the
Courts."[^8]

Part 1 of the chapter provides a brief overview of cities' efforts to
govern food systems in Canada and traces the legal foundation for much
of this work to the conventional domains of municipal power. In Part 2,
we show that longstanding assumptions about municipalities' limited
jurisdiction over food issues are outdated. Over the past few decades,
Canadian courts have developed a set of legal principles that ground a
more modern---and expansive---interpretation of city power over food and
other complex social, economic and natural systems. Based on our reading
of the cases, we argue that the key problem facing cities is not a lack
of legal principle to underpin local innovation in food governance, but
the persistent uncertainty that arises from the inconsistent application
of those principles by the courts. Core components of Canadian municipal
law, in other words, remain in flux---a result that can understandably
lead municipal actors to hesitate in expanding their scope of action.
Nevertheless, in Part 3 we offer some early arguments as to why the
current era of legal uncertainty in Canadian municipal law should not be
approached as an insurmountable barrier for cities and their citizens
with the political will to take on new and greater roles in food systems
governance.

# The Scope of Municipal Food Governance

Until the late twentieth century, Canadian municipalities engaged in a
patchwork of food-related initiatives, each driven largely by individual
champions, business interests, wars or other exigencies. Several of the
earliest city ordinances governing the food system were motivated by
public health rationales such as waste disposal and food safety. In
1884, Toronto's first permanent Medical Officer of Health remarked
scornfully that Toronto was filled with "all kinds of decomposing
organic matter, such as rotten vegetables and fruit, dead animals and
fish"; four years later, Toronto's council approved the city's first
garbage incinerator.[^9] Throughout the 1890s, the city's municipal
public health department went on to imposed quality standards for food
staples such as butter, milk and bread that were vulnerable to
"adulteration."[^10]

In addition to regulating food standards, cities also invested directly
in food production. With the introduction of railways in 1853,[^11]
Toronto acquired the nickname "Hogtown," as abattoirs and packing plants
emerged in great numbers to exploit the city's capacity for mass
shipment of livestock. The city itself owned a feedlot near Fort York in
the late 1800s, and later opened the Toronto Municipal
slaughterhouse---one that was later sold to a private company in the
1960s and remained in operation until 2014.[^12] In the late 19th
century, municipalities hosting rail stops also offered plots
surrounding the station to enthusiastic residents and rail staff, who
planted elaborate flower and vegetable gardens.[^13] Supporters of these
initiatives proclaimed several benefits, including public proof of soil
fertility and providing an incentive for immigration.[^14] Railway
gardens were also perceived to offer the benefits of civic virtue to a
progressive public. In 1868, the editor of Canada Farmer observed that
"\[t\]he town artisan beholds with pleasure the little enclosure, and
thinks how easy it would be to get up such a scene of beauty in front of
his own cottage door... The little railway garden is thus not only a
source of pleasure, but an educator."[^15] Railway gardens were deemed
an expression of, and conduit for, "a life of health, piety and
community uplift."[^16] During the World Wars, municipalities offered up
vacant land to serve the dual purposes of producing food and action as a
symbolic demonstration of patriotism.[^17]

By the late twentieth century, Canadian cities faced growing public
pressure to address a range of food system concerns, from food supply
barriers in the form of urban food deserts[^18] to problems of obesity
and other health impacts related to food consumption.[^19] In 1990,
Toronto became the first municipality in Canada to create a Food Policy
Council (FPC)[^20] dedicated to reframing the city's agenda for
municipal food governance. Following Toronto's leadership, eight FPCs
formed in the 1990s, followed by 33 more in the 2000s---a trend that
continues to build. Some of the earliest FPCs looked to ground municipal
action in international human rights instruments and norms, bringing
their focus on food to the intersection between health and social
justice.[^21] In its early days, the Toronto Food Policy Council
authored reports, fund-raised, and consulted on numerous municipal
matters involving food, such as agricultural land preservation, food
waste recovery and community food capacity building[^22]---but its
pioneering Food Charter in 2001 placed primary emphasis on addressing
food system barriers to combat poverty and hunger.[^23] To date, the
policy efforts of FPCs and other organizations have motivated more than
60 local and regional governments[^24] and First Nations[^25] to develop
municipal food strategies adopting a range of approaches to and
priorities for local food governance.

The development of local FPCs and municipal food strategies in
Canada---and a broader awareness of and commitment to food issues at a
municipal level---is also consistent with a global trend toward local
involvement in the food sphere. The Johns Hopkins Center for a Liveable
Future reports that between 2008 and 2016, the number of local or
regional FPCs in the United States has more than tripled.[^26] In 2014,
the Mayor of Milan launched the Milan Urban Food Policy Pact, an
international protocol targeted at urban food issues.[^27] Inspired by
the reality that over half of global citizens live in urban areas---and
the projection that two-thirds of the world's population will live in
cities by 2050---the Food Pact commits its signatory cities to address
several issues connected with food, including hunger, environmental
degradation and protecting smallholder food producers.[^28]

## Municipal Initiatives

Despite the popular energy surrounding municipal food initiatives, Wendy
Mendes notes that a perceived lack of jurisdiction to implement
ambitious food agendas has caused significant hesitation around
policy-making at the municipal level.[^29] As a result, cities have
tended to rely on conventional modes and tools of municipal governance
to enact their food agendas. While a more comprehensive survey and
classification of local initiatives is beyond the scope of this chapter,
we draw on Heike Schroeder and Harriet Bulkeley's schematic of municipal
governance as "a plurality of modes of governing in which the role of
law takes on different forms" in order to sketch a picture of local food
governance in Canada along four dimensions: (1) self-governance; (2)
control and compliance; (3) service provision; and (4) enabling.[^30]

### Self-Governance

Self-governing municipal action refers to the changes and improvements
that cities make within their own operations, in order to "practice what
they preach." In recent years, new attention has been drawn to
municipalities' capacity to promote local food systems as a major
purchaser of goods and services.[^31] Municipal food procurement
policies may favour any preferred characteristic of certain goods, and
municipalities have adopted policies that prefer fairly traded,
sustainable,[^32] and, in particular, locally-produced foods. Though not
without controversy,[^33] the practice of buying local foods has been
embraced by diverse institutions and levels of government to support
several objectives, ranging from reducing carbon emissions to nurturing
relations between producers and consumers.[^34] In 2007, Markham became
the first municipality in North America to announce a formal commitment
to purchasing local foods.[^35] Thunder Bay is one of several
municipalities to follow Markham's lead, after a 2013 report found that
the city's public sector institutions would spend \$10 million on food
in 2014.[^36] Thunder Bay has since implemented an ambitious strategy,
resulting in a dramatic increase in local food procurement for city-run
institutions such as daycares, concession stands and residential
facilities.[^37] In 2013, Ontario also passed the *Local Food Act*[^38]
to encourage municipalities to adopt local food policies.[^39] The Act
was motivated both by a recognition of existing procurement efforts at
the local level and by a provincial network of actors and advocacy
organizations supportive of increased levels of local food
purchasing.[^40]

### Control and Compliance

Control and compliance in local food systems is mainly implemented
through municipalities' planning powers, along with the authority to
enact regulations, sanctions and incentives to achieve food systems
goals. Zoning by-laws constitute some of the most reliable municipal
powers invoked to impact food systems. A recent study of food systems
and zoning found that "\[l\]and use planning is a critical tool among
the strategies needed to redirect our food system into a new trajectory
toward improved health, environmental sustainability, small to midsize
farm viability, and community engagement."[^41]

The Calgary Food Policy Council is one of a host of FPCs that have used
land-use planning as a lever to effect food systems change. In response
to the Council's advocacy, Calgary approved a bundle of amendments to
its land use by-laws in 2017 aimed at increasing local food production,
processing and distribution.[^42] The approved amendments include new
"food production" uses that legalize and regulate indoor food production
in Industrial and Commercial zones;[^43] official definitions of food
production terminology that promote clarity of the by-law;[^44] and the
introduction of a Brewery, Winery and Distillery use in some Industrial
districts.[^45] Other revisions to land use by-laws are also underway
across the country, as municipalities respond to various food systems
challenges through their planning powers. For example, Squamish has
recognized a need to define the role of food trucks in its zoning
regulations,[^46] while Waterloo Region's Official Plan acknowledges
that mixed-use zoning is critical to ensuring that healthy food
destinations abut residential areas.[^47] Halifax's new Regional Plan
will permit and regulate a host of food uses, including beekeeping,
farmers' markets and compulsory edible landscaping.[^48] Though North
American city planners are still relative newcomers to the food systems
domain,[^49] they have taken a particularly active role in using city
planning powers to engage in food systems governance.

### Provision

Schroeder and Bulkeley describe this category of municipal action as
"the provision of infrastructures and services through which municipal
governments are able to influence the practices of individuals and the
trajectories of future development".[^50] In Canada, municipal
governments manage the collection and disposal of waste, as well as
recycling and composting programs.[^51] Municipal waste collection
schemes arose in response to pressing issues such as groundwater
contamination and rodent infestation.[^52] New strategies and
technologies are perpetually evolving to ease the environmental
repercussions of waste disposal.[^53] The last decade has seen a notable
increase in municipal composting systems, in recognition that
"\[b\]iodegradable material such as food waste constitutes approximately
forty percent of the residential waste stream".[^54] The introduction of
municipal composting programs has resulted in a massive increase in
household composting activities---for example, the introduction of a
curbside compost collection program in Ottawa-Gatineau increased
residents' composting activity from 16 to 61 percent.[^55]

Public transit is another component of service provision that can
seriously impact food systems. Pothukuchi and Kaufman note that
low-income individuals frequently depend on the public transit system to
access affordable food.[^56] In 2010, Saskatoon Public Health Services
undertook a study of public transit routes and access to
supermarkets.[^57] Finding that some neighbourhoods experienced poor
transit access to healthy food retail, the report proposes provisioning
solutions borrowed from other municipalities. These include specialized
transportation services to supermarkets, mobile grocery stores and food
markets, and municipally-run farmers' markets.[^58]

### Enabling

Enabling modes of municipal governing entail steering other
actors---including private businesses and voluntary sectors---to
contribute to public goods.[^59] In this mode, a municipality may
constitute one strand of a public-private partnership, or provide
financial incentives to stimulate collaborative projects. FPCs typically
advocate strongly for enabling initiatives. Unlike more discrete areas,
a functional food system is particularly amenable to---and perhaps even
dependent upon---the willingness of municipalities to seek out partners
and opportunities for creative collaboration. Metro Vancouver's Regional
Food System Action Plan, for example, pivots on opportunities for
collaboration, conceding that "\[m\]ost local governments rely on
community organizations to be on the front lines for food security
issues".[^60] The Guelph-Wellington Food Policy Working Group observes
that FPCs themselves are generally composed of representatives from
across the food system, including governmental and non-governmental
actors, and as such, "\[t\]he quality of work of food policy councils is
often a reflection of the quality of the collaboration between its
members".[^61]

Enabling governance may be complex---involving many private and public
bodies---or a relatively simple facilitation between local government
and private citizens. An example of the latter is the Edible Fruit Trees
interactive map, created by the City of Edmonton, which empowers
residents to glean[^62] free, publicly accessible fruit.[^63] More
complex enabling actions include initiatives such as Thunder Bay's
gleaning initiative, for which the city provides free transportation for
low-income families to private farms so they can pick vegetables at no
cost;[^64] Northumberland County's Business Retention and Expansion
project for local food, which began with a survey of local food
businesses and has resulted in a municipally-owned, not-for-profit
small-batch food processing facility;[^65] and the Halifax mobile food
market, a project that unites several municipal departments, civil
society organizations and private businesses to deliver weekly food
boxes to communities with barriers to food access.[^66]

# Uncertainty in Municipal Food Law

Canadian cities' initiatives to govern food systems should be applauded.
But apart from some isolated examples, municipal action remains confined
to a relatively small number of domains within historically core areas
of local competence. This limited scope is in line with the widely
shared assumption that the legal and regulatory authority of Canadian
municipalities is narrowly defined and strictly controlled---both
through their enabling legislation and by judicial review. In this
section, we argue that longstanding assumptions about the narrow scope
of municipal power are outdated and no longer represent an accurate
picture of Canadian municipal law as it has evolved over the last few
decades. Courts in particular have made increasingly broad and
permissive interpretations of local authority, affording cities
considerable freedom to address a range of issues affecting the health
and welfare of their citizens and the environment, and to act in concert
with other levels of government to achieve these ends. On our reading of
the cases, the key problem facing cities is not that they lack plausible
legal arguments to ground their authority over crucial aspects of food
systems governance. The challenge, instead, is that cities continue to
confront a set of deep uncertainties within and around evolving
doctrines about municipal power. Despite some promising judicial
decisions in this regard, without a clearer commitment on the part of
courts to lay a solid foundation for modern municipal governance, cities
have been understandably hesitant to embark on more ambitious
interventions in the food system. These challenges are compounded by the
broader context of rapidly shifting regional, provincial and national
food policies, as all levels of government currently work to negotiate
and define their respective roles and aspirations.

Nevertheless, as we argue in Part 3, these persistent legal and
political uncertainties may provide the very rationale for more
ambitious local action on food. Because local governments are especially
well-suited to address the challenges associated uncertainty and to
innovate in spite of it, there is good reason for cities not to wait for
the law to resolve itself more clearly or for courts or higher levels of
government to take the lead.

## Municipal Jurisdiction

Municipal power in Canada is delegated power. The *Constitution Act,
1867* grants provincial legislatures exclusive authority to make laws in
relation to their respective municipal corporations.[^67] Each province,
in turn, defines the authority of municipal governments through what is
often a complex suite of enabling legislation.[^68] Whenever a
municipality enacts a local ordinance or by-law, it must---like other
administrative actors---point to the statutory source that grounds its
law-making or rule-making powers. However, since municipalities are also
representative governments in their own right, a key question for courts
since Confederation has been how they should interpret the scope of
delegated municipal power and the degree of deference that courts ought
to show to municipal decision-makers in the process. While
municipalities have well-recognized powers to carry out their functions
in areas such as land-use control, building regulation, and waste
management, the question of when a municipality's by-law is *ultra
vires* its delegated authority takes on renewed significance in new
domains of municipal action such as food systems governance.

The municipal *vires* doctrine in Canada that underpins a narrow view of
municipal power over food has distinctively American roots. "Dillon's
rule" marks the starting point in this history, so-called after John
Dillon, an influential judge of the Iowa Supreme Court and the country's
leading authority on local government law who, writing in *Clinton v.
Cedar Rapids* in 1868, remarked that municipalities "owe their origin
to, and derive their powers and rights wholly from, the legislature. It
breathes into them the breath of life, without which they cannot
exist."[^69] As a rule of statutory interpretation later called the
"express authority doctrine,"[^70] Dillon's rule was imported to Canada
in the years after *Clinton*, with appellate courts embracing the idea
that municipalities "should be confined strictly within the limits of
their authority, and all attempts on their parts to exceed it should be
firmly repelled by the Courts."[^71] Municipal legislation would be
found *ultra vires* whenever courts could not locate an explicit and
sufficiently narrow grant of authority in the municipality's enabling
statutes. For much of the 20th century, municipalities would continue to
be regarded, taxonomically, as mere "creatures of the province" in a way
that strictly cabined their opportunities to innovate in policymaking
and governance at the local level.[^72]

A dual shift in the last decade of the twentieth century, however, began
to free municipalities from the confines of Dillon's rule---if not
wholly from the limitations inherent in their lack of constitutional
status.[^73] A series of provincial reforms, beginning with Alberta's
new *Municipal Government Act*[^74] in 1994, introduced a "spheres of
jurisdiction" approach to legislating municipal powers that identified
broad categories or heads of power, rather than narrow and specific
grants of authority.[^75] Just as importantly, these reforms popularized
omnibus provisions that included "good government" as a primary
municipal purpose and proclaimed that municipal councils properly held
jurisdiction over the safety, health and welfare of cities'
inhabitants.[^76] By 2001, most provinces had amended their legislation
to include these omnibus provisions, authorizing municipal governments
to act for the general welfare of their citizens.[^77]

Alongside these legislative reforms, by the early 1990s, courts were
beginning to break from the long-running consensus around Dillon's rule
as a core principle of statutory interpretation in the municipal
context. As late as *R. v. Greenbaum* in 1993, the Supreme Court was
unanimous in its decision that municipalities "can exercise only those
powers which are explicitly conferred upon them by a provincial
statute."[^78] The following year, in *Shell Canada Products Ltd. v.
Vancouver (City)*, Justice McLachlin's dissenting opinion defended the
Vancouver council's decision to boycott Shell for its support for the
South African apartheid regime, regarding it as a "measure related to
fostering and maintaining a sense of community identity" and therefore
within the purview of "good rule and government of the city."[^79]
Adopting a new principle of "benevolent construction" when interpreting
municipal authority, Justice McLachlin's dissent went on to caution that
"...courts should be reluctant to interfere with the decisions of
municipal councils. Judicial intervention is warranted only where a
municipality\'s exercise of its powers is clearly *ultra vires*, or
where council has run afoul of one of the other accepted limits on
municipal power".[^80] The dissenting view in *Shell* would eventually
be adopted by a majority of the Supreme Court in two cases at the turn
of the century. Tentatively, at first, the Court in *Nanaimo (City) v.
Rascal Trucking Ltd.* affirmed a broad, purposive approach to
interpreting municipal powers, while being careful to note that
municipalities may exercise only those powers conferred by the
provincial legislature.[^81] By the time it had reached its decision in
*Spraytech v. Hudson (Town)* a year later, finding that Québec's general
welfare provision authorized a municipal by-law limiting pesticide use,
the Court appeared to wholeheartedly reject Dillon's rule and embrace
the principle of "benevolent construction".[^82]

In *United Taxi Drivers\' Fellowship of Southern Alberta v. Calgary
(City)*, the Supreme Court reinforced Alberta's "spheres of
jurisdiction" approach to delegating municipal authority, finding that
Calgary retained its power to regulate the taxi industry by way of its
broad power to regulate businesses---even though the city's specific
power to regulate taxis had been repealed in the course of the broader
legislative reforms.[^83] The following year, the City of Toronto
successfully defended its new pesticide by-law at the Ontario Court of
appeal in *Croplife Canada v. Toronto (City)*, with the Court citing the
broad and purposive approach in *United Taxi* "as a new model for
interpreting municipal statutes, regardless of whether or not a
municipality is governed by an Alberta-like statute with flexible
powers."[^84]

On its face, this narrative about the ever-expanding nature of municipal
powers should be good news for cities embracing progressive approaches
to food systems governance. From this perspective, cities aspiring to
pursue local policies around food linked to the health and well-being of
their citizens and the environment might confidently rely on the
expanded nature of their enabling provisions and general welfare powers,
along with the courts' more benevolent approach to judicial review. The
shadow of Dillon's rule, however, has proven to be difficult to
escape.[^85] In *Neskonlith Indian Band v. Salmon Arm (City)*, the
British Columbia Court of Appeal appeared to go out of its way to affirm
Dillon's rule, citing a late-19th century municipal law textbook
expounding the doctrine.[^86] As recently as 2015, the Saskatchewan
Court of Appeal expressed a persistent uncertainty as to whether it
should interpret municipal powers "on the basis of Dillon\'s rule or the
softer approach espoused by the dissent in *Shell.*"[^87] Other courts
have reinforced the idea that "the full scope of a municipality's powers
has yet to be delineated by the courts."[^88]

The Superior Court of Ontario's decision in *Eng v. Toronto (City)* is
instructive in terms of courts' persistent ambivalence about municipal
power in the food law context.[^89] In 2011, the City of Toronto enacted
a by-law providing that "no person shall possess, sell or consume shark
fin or shark fin food products within the city of Toronto."[^90] In
*Eng*, the city attempted to justify its by-law on the argument that
"the consumption of shark fin and shark fin products may have an adverse
impact on the health, safety and well-being of persons and on the
economic, social and environmental well-being of the City of
Toronto."[^91] Despite the court's reliance on Justice McLachlin's
approach in *Shell*, the city's rationale was rejected because the harms
associated with shark fin harvesting---namely threats to shark
populations and the health of marine ecosystems---were not "municipal
issues" within the meaning of the *City of Toronto Act*. In particular,
the court adopted the majority's view in *Shell* that the scope of
municipal jurisdiction is "territorially" bounded and cannot be
primarily directed at matters beyond the geographic boundary of the
city.[^92]

## Subsidiarity

One consequence of an expanded scope for municipal jurisdiction over
food is that it produces new possibilities for conflict with federal and
provincial initiatives and thus the possibility of being rendered
inoperative. A second line of recent cases has generated a parallel
source of optimism and confusion about local food governance---here,
regarding the degree to which municipal governments are free to act in
spite of, or in concert with, legislative action on the same matter by
higher levels of government.

Other than the power to enact the by-law, a second issue in *Spraytech*,
above, was whether the Town of Hudson's by-law was inoperative because
it conflicted with federal and provincial regimes that also regulated
pesticide use. In upholding the by-law, the Supreme Court applied the
standard "impossibility of dual compliance" test to evaluate whether or
not there was an actual conflict in operation between the different
regimes[^93]---but it was Justice L'Heureux-Dubé's invocation of the
principle of subsidiarity in the judgement's preamble that has attracted
by far the most attention.[^94] In the judge's framing, subsidiarity "is
the proposition that law-making and implementation are often best
achieved at a level of government that is not only effective, but also
closest to the citizens affected and thus most responsive to their
needs, to local distinctiveness, and to population diversity."[^95] The
principle of subsidiarity was most recently invoked at the Supreme Court
in the context of a municipal-federal conflict in *Rogers Communications
Inc. v. Châteauguay (City)*, with Justice Gascon, in a concurring
judgment, observing that a municipality adopting "a resolution for the
purposes of protecting the well‑being and health of its residents and
ensuring the harmonious development of its territory would normally be
considered to be the government at the level at which the adoption of
such measures would be best achieved".[^96]

Like Justice McLachlin's approach to the benevolent construction of
municipal authority in *Shell*, the subsidiarity principle ought to be
good news for cities seeking more latitude over local food governance.
However, subsidiarity remains a heavily contested legal concept, with
some commentators going so far as to argue that subsidiarity "is not a
justiciable doctrine but rather a political principle."[^97] The
overarching problem is that subsidiarity raises a direct challenge to
the delegated nature of municipal powers, offering an alternative source
for municipal authority that, at its logical extreme, would radically
upend the current structure of Canadian federalism. So far, the
principle has remained largely confined to judicial speculation and
side-statement. There is no question that a fuller embrace of
subsidiarity would endow municipalities with greater freedom to act on
food issues, but the degree to which courts have remained ambivalent
about the principle's status in Canadian municipal law only compounds
the uncertainty that cities currently face.

# Municipal "Entrepreneurship"

Cities may be justifiably frustrated with the failure of Canadian courts
to build a more concrete legal foundation for local food system
governance. At the same time, cities and their advocates must recognize
that---at least from a legal perspective---it is inaccurate to
characterize municipalities as simply having "limited jurisdictional
authority over the food system."[^98] The larger challenge for cities,
as we see it, is that the scope of municipal authority over the food
system, and the degree of municipal autonomy to act, remain
indeterminate, contested and uncertain. Our central point is that, when
viewed in this light, municipal inaction on food can no longer be
justified purely on the basis of legal barriers---though, of course,
cities continue to confront other barriers to achieving their goals, not
least of which is a lack of sufficient tax revenue and other financial
resources. As we argue in this final section, implicit in the
recognition of cities as "municipal food policy entrepreneurs" is the
unique capacity of local governments to address, and sometimes innovate
in spite of, legal uncertainty. That view is consistent with the idea,
suggested by several prominent scholars of food studies, that "\[w\]ith
their closer ties to the 'grass roots' of the nation, municipalities
have frequently exploited ambiguities in jurisdiction and become the
source of major innovations" in food law and policy.[^99] Below, we
briefly outline three arguments in support of this view based on
historical experience, the nature of local political institutions and
the trend toward local policy activism in analogous domains.

## History

Our claim is that local governments may be especially well-equipped to
act during moments of legal flux. This at least seems to be a central
lesson from an earlier period of comparative legal history around the
scope of municipal powers. While Dillon's rule---the rule describing a
narrow scope for municipal governments' powers---would become firmly
entrenched in American and later Canadian law by the early decades of
the 20th century, the last half of the 19th century was one in which
"American localities' legal status was highly uncertain."[^100] At odds
with Dillon's perspective on local governments as "creatures of the
state" was the competing view, developed mainly by the lawyer Thomas
Cooley, that the American people had reserved a degree of sovereignty
not delegated to the states and subsequently expressed in the principle
of local self-government. It was this expansive idea of broad and
quasi-independent local authority---one with echoes in the modern
principle of subsidiarity, as well as popular movements toward food
sovereignty---that Dillon sought to resist. After years of contestation
between these competing ideas about local government both in and outside
the courts, Cooley's view of local government authority was eventually
rejected in American law by 1900, and Dillon's firmly entrenched.[^101]
In the interim, the battle between these two ideas generated
considerable legal uncertainty about the character of American cities
and the scope of their powers throughout the last half of the 19th
century.

Nevertheless, doctrinal battles and their consequent uncertainties did
not prevent cities in the last half of the 19th century from making
"remarkable innovations" in several key areas of local governance.[^102]
Many of these innovations were in the area of public health, and in
particular in municipal health planning, in an era before urban planning
had any real statutory basis and was not yet seen as a coherent field of
professional practice or governance. For example, municipal officials
and engineers concerned primarily with urban sanitary conditions
developed and implemented new comprehensive health planning
procedures---such as the plan implemented in New York City in 1864---to
identify the sources and causes of infectious disease in the city.
[^103] The urban reformers who developed these early sanitary programs
did so by building political and financial support on the ground, such
as from wealth downtown merchants, rather than seeking formal authority
or funds from the state. In other areas of urban life, local governments
innovated in the gaps left by declining state and private action. When
poor economic conditions during this era prompted state governments to
withdraw investment from transportation infrastructure, local
governments promptly filled the void. Fearing the consequences of
declining access to railways and canals, cities assumed the fiscal and
service obligations that are now widely accepted as areas of municipal
responsibility.[^104] While these historical examples are only
suggestive, they certainly indicate that policy innovations at the
municipal level during periods of legal uncertainty are by no means
impossible.

## Political Institutions 

A second argument that legal uncertainty about city power should not be
seen as a major impediment to city action around food rests on the
unique structures of local political institutions---especially the
office of the mayor. Conventionally marginalized as unimportant
political figures, city mayors have received new attention for their
roles in motivating progressive urban policies. Popular works such as
Benjamin Barber's *If Mayors Ruled the World* emphasize the extent to
which cities' initiatives on a range of social issues stand in stark
contrast to the inertia that too often pervades higher orders of
government.[^105]

How then does the institutional structure of the mayoralty help to
combat uncertainty about the legal scope of a city's powers? Canadian
mayors are, in effect, unique among other political leaders around the
country because they tend to be elected directly by their constituents,
rather than through ward-based council elections or the mechanisms of
party politics familiar at provincial and federal levels. While the
structures of mayoral authority, autonomy and accountability vary
considerably from one city to the next, strong mayors can be an antidote
to legal uncertainty because they represent and must be responsive to
city-wide interests in ways that make them salient to a broad
cross-section of the urban electorate. These dynamics can lead mayors to
act as focal points for policy solutions---even where legal ambiguities
raise questions about whether those solutions definitively fall within
the ambit of local power. In this sense, mayors themselves operate as
"policy entrepreneurs" according to the definition of entrepreneurship
given by institutional scholars who explore how leaders "look for and
act on loose spots in the nexus of ideas, institutions and incentives"
to promote new ideas that can shift policies and laws because they
reconfigure how constituents think about the fundamental causal
relationships between means and ends.[^106]

City mayors' effectiveness in dealing with legal uncertainty is one of
the key comparative lessons from looking at how cities have dealt with
climate governance as a similarly uncertain, contested and complex
policy area. As Katherine Trisolini notes, in the wake of federal
inaction on climate change after the Kyoto Protocol, "hundreds of
America's mayors ... enacted emissions reduction plans to combat a
global problem extending far beyond their jurisdictions."[^107] In the
United Kingdom, London's mayor Ken Livingston was directly responsible
for developing the city's first energy strategy with a substantial focus
on carbon dioxide reductions, "despite the lack of a statutory remit to
do so."[^108] Of particular interest is that this early move by the City
of London later motivated upstream action by Parliament to amend the
city's governing legislation and impose an explicit duty on the mayor to
prepare, publish, and implement climate change mitigation and adaptation
strategies.[^109] In addition to serving as a comparative model for
local initiative to govern food systems, municipal action on climate
also has a substantive link to local food policy, with several municipal
food strategies in Canada citing the need to address climate change as a
primary justification for food systems governance.[^110]

## Local Policy Activism

Finally, legal ambiguities around the scope of municipal power in Canada
may provide opportunities for cities to act in the register of what Lori
Riverstone-Newell calls "local policy activism."[^111] While both the
Canadian federalism jurisprudence and increasing scholarly support for
different modes of "multi-level governance" have promoted opportunities
for cooperation between local and senior governments, some cities have
adopted a more confrontational stance to expanding the scope of their
power. Riverstone-Newell cites the example of Sedgwick, Maine, which in
2011 passed a local ordinance declaring state and federal licensing and
inspection regulations to be "unlawful" to the extent that they impede
access to local foods.[^112] Likewise, the prominent rise of so-called
"sanctuary cities" in the United States acting to shield undocumented
immigrants against federal immigration policies have coincided with a
host of local ordinances that regulate immigration-related matters in
areas such as housing and employment.[^113] While jurisdictional
uncertainty may make it more difficult to negotiate cooperative rights
and responsibilities across different levels of government, it
simultaneously offers a broader range of plausible legal claims to
cities operating as local policy activists in challenging the direction
of policies being enacted at other levels.

# Conclusion

Nothing in our analysis should be taken to suggest that a well-defined
legal foundation for local governance of food is unimportant, nor that
law is somehow irrelevant to local institutions and polices designed to
address food system challenges. On the contrary, we suggest that an
innovative and creative use of municipal law is crucial for cities to
meet their aspirations to be full participants in Canada's federalist
food system. In is inherent in our system of law that doctrines and
judicial attitudes evolve, sometimes bringing with them periods of
considerable uncertainty. The present moment of instability, however,
should not deter cities from building on the meaningful work they have
already undertaken in food governance, nor should it distract from
avenues that are readily available for cities to expand their scope of
action in new directions.

[^1]: Rod MacRae & Kendal Donahue, *Municipal food policy entrepreneurs:
    A preliminary analysis of how Canadian cities and regional districts
    are involved in food system change* (Toronto Food Policy Council,
    Vancouver Food Policy Council & The Canadian Agri-Food Policy
    Institute, 2013), online:
    \<http://capi-icpa.ca/pdfs/2013/Municipal_Food_Policy_Entrepreneurs_Final_Report.pdf\>.

[^2]: Ana Moragues-Faus & Kevin Morgan, "Reframing the Foodscape: The
    Emergent World of Urban Food Policy" (2015) 47:7 Environment and
    Planning A: Economy and Space 1558 at 1558.

[^3]: "Text - Milan Urban Food Policy Pact" (15 October 2015), online:
    \<https://www.milanurbanfoodpolicypact.org/text/\>.

[^4]: MacRae & Donahue, *supra* note 1 at 2.

[^5]: Food policy councils are typically comprised of stakeholders from
    diverse sectors of a food system. Their principal functions are to
    evaluate food policies, foster dialogue and collaboration between
    food system actors, and initiate or support programs that serve
    local needs. See: Allyson Scherb et al, "Exploring Food System
    Policy: A Survey of Food Policy Councils in the United States"
    (2012) 2:4 Journal of Agriculture, Food Systems, and Community
    Development 1. We discuss the roles food policy councils and
    municipal food strategy initiatives play in more detail in Part 1.

[^6]: "A municipal food strategy is an official plan or road map that
    helps city governments integrate a full spectrum of urban food
    system issues within a single policy framework that includes food
    production... food processing, food distribution, food access and
    food waste management": Brent Mansfield & Wendy Mendes, "Municipal
    Food Strategies and Integrated Approaches to Urban Agriculture:
    Exploring Three Cases from the Global North" (2013) 18:1
    International Planning Studies 37 at 38.

[^7]: *R v Greenbaum*, \[1993\] 1 SCR 674, at 687.

[^8]: *Merritt v Toronto (City)*, (1895), 22 OAR 205, at 207.

[^9]: City of Toronto Archives, "An Infectious Idea: 125 Years of Public
    Health in Toronto" (2008), online:
    \<https://www.toronto.ca/city-government/accountability-operations-customer-service/access-city-information-or-records/city-of-toronto-archives/whats-online/web-exhibits/an-infectious-idea-125-years-of-public-health-in-toronto/an-infectious-idea-environmental-health/\>.

[^10]: *Ibid*.

[^11]: Derek Boles*, Toronto\'s Railway Heritage* (Charleston, SC:
    Arcadia, 2009) at 7.

[^12]: Eric Atkins, "End of a Chapter in Hogtown History After Toronto's
    Last Pig Plant Shuts its Doors," *The Globe and Mail* (30 May 2014),
    online:
    \<[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/toronto/the-end-of-hogtown-torontos-last-pig-plant-shuts-its-doors/article18932864/](file:///C:\Users\Angela\Dropbox\Food%20Law%20Book\Chapter%20Submissions\%22)\>.

[^13]: Edwinna von Baeyer, "Manitoba History: The Rise and Fall of the
    Manitoba Railway Garden" (1996) 31 *Manitoba History*, online:
    \<http://www.mhs.mb.ca/docs/mb_history/31/railwaygarden.shtml\>.

[^14]: *Ibid*.

[^15]: "Railway Gardens", *Canada Farmer* 5 (15 June 1868) at 185.

[^16]: von Baeyer, *supra* note 13.

[^17]: Ian Mosby, "Victory Gardens", *The Canadian Encyclopedia* (22
    September 2015), online:
    \<http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca/en/article/victory-gardens/\>.

[^18]: Jessica Rose, "Cultivating Public Health: Urban Farming as an
    Essential Municipal Tool to Address Unbalanced Food Environments and
    Household Food Insecurity in the Halifax Peninsula" (2018) 4 Windsor
    Rev Legal Soc Issues -- Digital Companion 51; Nairne Cameron et al,
    "Cornering the market: Restriction of retail supermarket locations"
    (2010) 28 Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy 905.

[^19]: Belinda Reeve et al, "State and Municipal Innovations in Obesity
    Policy: Why Localities Remain a Necessary Laboratory for Innovation"
    (2015) 105:3 American Journal of Public Health 442.

[^20]: MacRae & Donahue, *supra* note 1 at 16.

[^21]: Alison Blay-Palmer, "The Canadian Pioneer: The Genesis of Urban
    Food Policy in Toronto" (2009) 14:4 International Planning Studies
    401 at 403, 405.

[^22]: Blay-Palmer, *ibid* at 406.

[^23]: City of Toronto, "Toronto's Food Charter" (2001), online:
    \<[http://tfpc.to/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/Toroto_Food_Charter.jpg](file:///C:\Users\Angela\Dropbox\Food%20Law%20Book\Chapter%20Submissions\%22h)\>.
    Canada's ratification of the International Covenant on Social,
    Cultural and Economic Rights ("ICSCER") in 1976 requires at least a
    tacit commitment to upholding the "fundamental right of everyone to
    be free from hunger: *International Covenant on Economic, Social and
    Cultural Rights,* GA Res 2200A (XXI), UN Doc A/RES/2200 (1966), at
    art 11, online:
    \<http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/ProfessionalInterest/cescr.pdf\>.
    FPCs and their advocates routinely cite this instrument as a legal
    cornerstone of their mandate. For example: Peterborough Social
    Planning Council, "UN Report on Food Security, 2012" (2012), online:
    \<
    http://www.pspc.on.ca/sites/default/files/attach/infonote_UN_food_security_report.pdf\>
    at 3; Karen Rideout et al, "Bringing Home the Right to Food in
    Canada: Challenges and Possibilities for Achieving Food Security"
    (2007) 10:6 Public Health Nutrition 566 at 571.

[^24]: MacRae & Donahue, *supra* note 1 at 2.

[^25]: Holly Dillabough, *Food for Thought: Access to Food in Canada's
    Remote North* (Thunder Bay: Northern Policy Institute, 2016),
    online:
    \<http://www.northernpolicy.ca/upload/documents/publications/commentaries/commentary-dillabough-food-en-print-16.0.pdf\>.

[^26]: Lily Sussman & Karen Bassarab, *Food Policy Council Report 2016*
    (Johns Hopkins Center for a Liveable Future, 2016), online:
    \<https://assets.jhsph.edu/clf/mod_clfResource/doc/FPC%20Report%202016_Final.pdf\>
    at 14.

[^27]: "History - Milan Urban Food Policy Pact" (15 October 2015),
    online: \<https://www.milanurbanfoodpolicypact.org/history/\>.

[^28]: "Text - Milan Urban Food Policy Pact", *supra* note 3.

[^29]: Wendy Mendes, "Negotiating a Place for 'Sustainability' Policies
    in Municipal Planning and Governance: The Role of Scalar Discourses
    and Practices" (2007) 11:1 Space and Polity 95 at 102.

[^30]: Heike Schroeder & Harriet Bulkeley, "Global Cities and the
    Governance of Climate Change: What is the Role of Law in Cities?"
    (2008) 36 Fordham Urb. LJ 313 at 351.

[^31]: PolicyLink, *Equitable Development Toolkit: Local Food
    Procurement* (PolicyLink, March 2015), online:
    \<http://www.policylink.org/sites/default/files/edtk_local-food-procurement.pdf\>.

[^32]: A commitment to purchasing sustainable foods may include
    considerations of nutritional content, environmental impact, labour
    conditions, and animal welfare. See e.g. The Los Angeles Food Policy
    Council, *The Good Food Purchasing Pledge: A Case Study Evaluation &
    Year One Progress Update* (The Los Angeles Food Policy Council, June
    2014), online:
    \<http://goodfoodla.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/Good-Food-Purchasing-Policy_Final_0614.pdf\>.

[^33]: Branden Born & Mark Purcell, "Avoiding the Local Trap: Scale and
    Food Systems in Planning Research" (2006) 26 Journal of Planning
    Education and Research 195.

[^34]: Madeleine Granvik, "The Localization of Food Systems -- An
    Emerging Issue for Swedish Municipal Authorities" (2012) 17:2
    International Planning Studies 113 at 114.

[^35]: Robert Duffy & Anthony Pringle, *Buying Local: Tools for
    Forward-Thinking Institutions* (Vancouver: Columbia Institute, LOCO
    BC & ISIS Research Centre at the Sauder School of Business, 2013),
    online:
    \<http://www.sauder.ubc.ca/Faculty/Research_Centres/Centre_for_Social_Innovation_and_Impact_Investing/Research/Social_Innovation/\~/media/Files/ISIS/Reports/Social%20Economy%20Reports/Buying%20Local%20-%20Tools%20for%20Forward%20Thinking%20%20Institutions.ashx\>.

[^36]: Thunder Bay and Area Food Strategy, "Food Procurement", online:
    \<http://tbfoodstrategy.ca/pillars/food-procurement/\>.

[^37]: In 2016, the City spent 38 per cent of its procurement dollars on
    local foods, an 11 per cent increase from 2015: Doug Diaczuk, "City
    Buying More Locally Produced Food", *Thunder Bay News Watch* (14
    February 2017), online:
    \<https://www.tbnewswatch.com/local-news/city-buying-more-locally-produced-food-535401\>.

[^38]: SO 2013, c.7.

[^39]: See e.g. Deloitte, *Best practices in local food: A guide for
    municipalities* (Ontario Municipal Knowledge Network, 2013), online:
    \<https://www.amo.on.ca/AMO-PDFs/Reports/2013/2013BestPracticesinLocalFoodAGuideforMunicipalitie.aspx\>.

[^40]: Alison Blay-Palmer, Roberta Sonnino & Julien Custot, "A Food
    Politics of the Possible? Growing Sustainable Food Systems Through
    Networks of Knowledge" (2016) 33 Agriculture and Human Values 27 at
    37.

[^41]: Ellen Desjardins, John Lubczynski & Marc Xuereb, "Incorporating
    Policies for a Healthy Food System into Land Use Planning: The Case
    of Waterloo Region, Canada" (2011) 2:1 Journal of Agriculture, Food
    Systems and Community Development 127 at 127.

[^42]: City of Calgary, "Land Use Bylaw Amendments: food growing,
    processing and distribution", online:
    \<https://calgary.ca/PDA/pd/Pages/Calgary-Land-Use-bylaw-1P2007/Land-Use-Bylaw-Amendments-food.aspx?redirect=/foodamendments\>.

[^43]: Calgary Land Use Bylaw, Part 4, Division 2, section 198.1, "Food
    Production".

[^44]: Calgary Land Use Bylaw, Part 1, Division 2, section 13, "General
    definitions".

[^45]: Calgary Land Use Bylaw, Part 4, Division 2, section 156.1,
    "Brewery, Winery and Distillery".

[^46]: District of Squamish, "Zoning Bylaw Update 2016", online:
    \<https://squamish.ca/yourgovernment/projects-and-initiatives/2016-completed-projects/zoningupdate2016/#Foodtruck\>.

[^47]: City of Waterloo, "Official Plan", online:
    \<http://www.waterloo.ca/en/contentresources/resources/government/OP_Nov2016_Consolidated_version.pdf\>
    at 34. A growing body of research illustrates correlations between
    obesity and the built environment; see e.g. Tim Townshend & Amelia
    Lake, "Obesogenic Environments: Current Evidence of the Built and
    Food Environments" (2017) 137:1 Perspectives in Public Health 38.

[^48]: Planning & Development Halifax, *Draft Regional Centre Secondary
    Municipal Planning Strategy: Package A -- Centre Plan 2018*, online:
    \<[https://www.shapeyourcityhalifax.ca/1041/documents/9160](https://www.shapeyourcityhalifax.ca/centre-plan/documents)\>
    at 112.

[^49]: In one 2016 study of American city planners, 75 per cent of
    respondents reported that they have limited to no engagement in food
    systems planning: Samina Raja & Chunuan Diao, "Community-Led Urban
    Agriculture Policy Making: A View from the United States" (2016) 31
    Urban Agriculture Magazine 18 at 19.

[^50]: Schroeder & Bulkeley, *supra* note 30 at 354.

[^51]: Government of Canada, "Municipal solid waste: a shared
    responsibility", online:
    \<https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/managing-reducing-waste/municipal-solid/shared-responsibility.html\>
    (last updated August 11, 2017).

[^52]: Cole Engineering, "Trash: Part 1 -- The Past and Present of Solid
    Waste Management" (January 2016), online:
    \<http://www.coleengineering.ca/blog/2016/01/trash-part-1-the-past-and-present-of-solid-waste-management\>.

[^53]: Laurie Giroux, *State of Waste Management in Canada* (Canadian
    Council of Ministers of the Environment, 2014), online:
    \<https://www.ccme.ca/files/Resources/waste/wst_mgmt/State_Waste_Mgmt_in_Canada%20April%202015%20revised.pdf\>.

[^54]: Environment Canada, "Technical Document on Municipal Solid Waste
    Organics Processing", Cat. No.: En14-83/2013E, online:
    \<https://www.ec.gc.ca/gdd-mw/3E8CF6C7-F214-4BA2-A1A3-163978EE9D6E/13-047-ID-458-PDF_accessible_ANG_R2-reduced%20size.pdf\>
    at i.

[^55]: Iman Mustapha, "Composting by Households in Canada", *Statistics
    Canada*, November 27, 2015, 16‐002‐X, online:
    \<http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/16-002-x/2013001/article/11848-eng.htm\>.

[^56]: Kameshwari Pothukuchi & Jerome L Kaufman, "Placing the Food
    System on the Urban Agenda: The Role of Municipal Institutions in
    Food Systems Planning" (1999) 16 Agriculture and Human Values 213 at
    217.

[^57]: T Kershaw et al, Food Access in Saskatoon Community Report
    (Saskatoon: Saskatoon Health Region, 2010), online:
    \<https://www.saskatoonhealthregion.ca/locations_services/Services/Health-Observatory/Documents/Reports-Publications/CommunityFoodAccessReportOct2010.pdf\>.

[^58]: *Ibid* at 18. A successful example of mobile food provision is
    Halifax's Mobile Food Market, which has been delivering affordable,
    high quality, fresh fruits and vegetables to communities with
    limited food access since 2015: Mobile Food Market, online:
    http://www.mobilemarket.ca.

[^59]: Schroeder & Bulkeley, *supra* note 30 at 356.

[^60]: Metro Vancouver, *Regional Food System Action Plan: 2016*,
    online:
    \<http://www.metrovancouver.org/services/regional-planning/PlanningPublications/RegionalFoodSystemActionPlan.pdf\>.

[^61]: Katrin Sawatzky, Thomas Armitage & Erin Pratley, "An Overview of
    Food Strategies from Select Canadian Regions: Informing the
    Guelph-Wellington Food Strategy Initiative", *University of Guelph
    Institute for Community Engaged Scholarship* (March 30, 2015) at 7.

[^62]: Gleaning is the practice of collecting excess fresh foods from
    farms, gardens, restaurants or other sources, typically to provide
    to low-income individuals. For more, see: USDA, "Let's Glean!:
    United We Serve Toolkit" (2010), online:
    https://www.usda.gov/sites/default/files/documents/usda_gleaning_toolkit.pdf;
    Amber Leasure-Earnhardt, Carrie A Scrufari & Rebecca Valentine, "The
    National Gleaning Project: The Importance of Gleaning and Fresh Food
    Recovery in a Sustainable and Just Food System" in Ian Werkheiser &
    Zachary Piso, eds, *Food Justice in US and Global Contexts* (Cham:
    Springer, 2017) 171.

[^63]: The City of Edmonton, "Edible Fruit Trees", online:
    \<https://data.edmonton.ca/w/dsgm-wamx/depj-dfck?cur=Y5j9SqvIlzl&from=root\>.

[^64]: Deloitte, *supra* note 39 at 34.

[^65]: *Ibid* at 46.

[^66]: Halifax Mobile Food Market, "Partners", online:
    \<http://www.mobilefoodmarket.ca/partners/\>.

[^67]: *Constitution Act, 1867* (UK), 30 & 31 Vict, c 3, reprinted in
    RSC 1985, App II, No 5, s 92(8)

[^68]: David Lidstone, *Assessment of the Municipal Acts of the
    Provinces and Territories* (Federation of Canadian Municipalities,
    2004) at 3.

[^69]: *Clinton v Cedar Rapids and the Missouri River Railroad* (24 Iowa
    455; 1868).

[^70]: Stanley M Makuch, Neil Craik & Signe B Leisk, *Canadian Municipal
    and Planning Law*, 2d ed (Toronto: Thomson Carswell, 2004) at 82.

[^71]: *Merritt v Toronto (City)* (1895), 22 OAR 205 (CA) at 207.

[^72]: For example, "Municipal governments... are creatures of the
    provincial government... these institutions have no constitutional
    status or independent autonomy and the province has [absolute and
    unfettered legal power]{.underline} to do with them as it wills."
    *Ontario Public School Boards\' Assn. v Ontario (Attorney General)*,
    \[1997\] OJ No 3184 (QL) at para 41 (emphasis added).

[^73]: See Ron Levi & Mariana Valverde, "Freedom of the City: Canadian
    Cities and the Quest for Governmental Status" (2006) 44:3 Osgoode
    Hall LJ 410 at 423.

[^74]: RSA 1994, c M-26.

[^75]: For an overview of the reforms, see Levi & Valverde, *supra* note
    73.

[^76]: RSA 2000, c M-26, at ss 3, 7(a).

[^77]: Alberta, Manitoba, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Saskatchewan and
    Ontario all followed in Alberta's footsteps, and amended their
    municipal acts to include more expansive language. At the time of
    writing, Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland and Labrador are the
    lone holdouts; these Acts persist in adhering to the so-called
    doctrine of prescribed powers. See *Municipalities Act*, SNL 1999, c
    M-24; *Municipalities Act*, RSPEI 1988, c M-13.

[^78]: *R v Greenbaum,* \[1993\] 1 SCR 674, at para 24.

[^79]: *Shell Canada Products Ltd. v Vancouver (City)*, \[1994\] 1 SCR
    231.

[^80]: *Ibid* at 248.

[^81]: *Nanaimo (City) v Rascal Trucking Ltd.,* \[2000\] 1 SCR 342, at
    paras 17-18.

[^82]: *114957 Canada Ltée. (Spraytech, Société d\'arrosage) v Hudson
    (Town),* \[2001\] 2 SCR 241 \[*Spraytech*\].

[^83]: *United Taxi Drivers\' Fellowship of Southern Alberta v Calgary
    (City)*, \[2004\] 1 SCR 485.

[^84]: Levi & Valverde, *supra* note 73 at 428.

[^85]: As David Hamilton has recently noted, "Dillon's Rule is more
    alive in Canada than in most of the American states." David K
    Hamilton, *Measuring the Effectiveness of Regional Governing
    Systems: A Comparative Study of City Regions in North America* (New
    York: Springer, 2012) at 26.

[^86]: *Neskonlith Indian Band v Salmon Arm (City*), 354 DLR (4th)
    696; \[2012\] 12 WWR 1, at para 8, citing: John
    Dillon, *Commentaries on the Law of Municipal Corporations*, 4th ed
    (Boston: Little, Brown, 1890).

[^87]: *Duffield v Prince Albert (City)*, 2015 SKCA 46, at para 34. See
    also *Rogier v Halifax (Regional Municipality),* 2009 NSSC 14, at
    para 53 (relying on *Greenbaum* to justify a narrow interpretation
    of municipal power).

[^88]: *Passutto Hotels (1984) Ltd. v Red Deer (City of)*, 2006 ABQB
    641, at para 20.

[^89]: *Eng v Toronto (City)*, 2012 ONSC 6818, \[2012\] OJ No. 5661.

[^90]: City of Toronto, By-law No. 12347-2011, *To prohibit the
    possession, sale and consumption of shark fin and shark fin food
    products* (1 September, 2012).

[^91]: *Eng v Toronto (City)*, *supra* note 89 at para 3.

[^92]: *Ibid* at para 66.

[^93]: *Spraytech*, *supra* note 82 at paras 36-39.

[^94]: For more on the development of subsidiarity as a central
    principle of contemporary European governance, see: Kees van
    Kersbergen, "Subsidiarity as a Principle of Governance in the
    European Union" (2004) 2:2 Comparative European Politics 142.

[^95]: *Spraytech*, *supra* note 82 at para 3.

[^96]: *Rogers Communications Inc. v. Châteauguay (City*), \[2016\] 1
    SCR 467, at para 84.

[^97]: Levi & Valverde, *supra* note 73 at 424.

[^98]: MacRae & Donahue, *supra* note 1 at 2.

[^99]: Mustafa Koc et al, "Getting Civil about Food: The Interactions
    Between Civil Society and the State to Advance Sustainable Food
    Systems in Canada" (2008) 3:2 Journal of Hunger & Environmental
    Nutrition 122 at 126.

[^100]: Joan C Williams, "The Constitutional Vulnerability of American
    Local Government: The Politics of City Status in American Law"
    (1986) Wisc L Rev 83 at 88.

[^101]: *Ibid* at 90.

[^102]: Stanley K Schultz & Clay McShane, "To Engineer the Metropolis:
    Sewers, Sanitation, and City Planning in Late-Nineteenth-century
    America" (1978) 65:2 The Journal of American History 389 at 407.

[^103]: Jon A Peterson, "The Impact of Sanitary Reform upon American
    Urban Planning, 1840-1890" (1979) 13:1 Journal of Social History 83
    at 89-91.

[^104]: Joel A Tarr, "The Evolution of the Urban Infrastructure in the
    Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries" in Royce Hanson, ed,
    *Perspectives on Urban Infrastructure* (Washington: National Academy
    Press, 1984) 4 at 8.

[^105]: Benjamin Barber, *If Mayors Rules the World: Dysfunctional
    Nations, Rising Cities* (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2013).

[^106]: Edward J López & Wane A Leighton, *Madmen, Intellectuals, and
    Academic Scribblers: The Economic Engine of Political Change*
    (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2013) at 190.

[^107]: Katherine A Trisolini, "All Hands on Deck: Local Governments and
    the Potential for Bidirectional Climate Change Regulation" (2010)
    62:3 Stan L Rev 669 at 671.

[^108]: Schroeder & Bulkeley, *supra* note 30 at 335.

[^109]: *Greater London Authority Act 2007* (UK), c 24, §§ 41-44.

[^110]: For example, see: The Calgary Food Committee & Serecon
    Management Consulting Inc, "Calgary Food System Assessment & Action
    Plan" (2012), online:
    \<http://www.calgary.ca/PDA/pd/Documents/Calgary-Eats/CalgaryEATS-Full-Food-System-Assessment-Action-Plan-for-Calgary.pdf\>
    at 15; David McKeown, "Toronto Food Strategy: Cultivating Food
    Connections" (2010), online:
    \<https://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2010/hl/bgrd/backgroundfile-30482.pdf\>
    at 4; Thunder Bay and Area Food Strategy Steering Committee,
    "Thunder Bay and Area Food Strategy" (2014), online:
    \<http://tbfoodstrategy.ca/files/FoodStrategy_2014_LoRes_WEB.pdf\>
    at 7.

[^111]: Lori Riverstone-Newell, *Renegade Cities, Public Policy, and the
    Dilemmas of Federalism* (Boulder: First Forum Press, 2014).

[^112]: *Ibid* at 1.

[^113]: Matthew J Parlow, "Progressive Policy-Making on the Local Level:
    Rethinking Traditional Notions of Federalism" (2008) 17:2 Temple
    Political & Civil Rights Review 371 at 376-78.
