---
abstract: Despite growing attention to open educational resources in
  higher education, there is little evidence that the move toward open
  materials has yet been embraced by Canadian law teachers. In this
  paper, we make an early attempt to compile the available data on open
  legal casebooks produced for use in Canadian law schools and we engage
  with the literature on commons-based peer production to develop a
  theory explaining why collaborative engagement has been slow to date.
  We then describe how we think Canadian law teachers can overcome
  current barriers to collaborative open casebook authorship, using an
  experimental property law casebook project we are developing to
  illustrate.
author: Jamie Baxter and Elyse Loewen
authors:
  - baxter
  - loewen 
bibliography: ./oslaw.bib
csl: ./mcgill-en.csl
date: 2023-04-01
email: jamie.baxter@dal.ca
numbersections: true
projects:
  - opensourcelaw
publication: 10 Canadian Legal Education Annual Review 103
publication_types:
- 3
secnumdepth: 2
shorttitle: Open Casebooks
tags:
- oslaw
- paper
title: Exit, Voice and Disloyalty in Open Casebooks
published: true
---

# Part I: Introduction

"Openness" has become a watchword for higher education in Canada.[^1]
From open-access textbooks and free online courses to a range of
initiatives around open data and publishing in research, calls for more
openness are everywhere on university campuses.[^2] This "open" movement
is moored in genuine optimism about the potential for digital media to
improve access and affordability, especially for students at a time when
they face soaring costs to post-secondary education.[^3] In smaller
measure, the move toward "open" is also driven by a shared enthusiasm
for new modes of knowledge production, based on the belief that
authors--freed from copyright constraints on sharing and re-use--will
collaborate to produce works that rival the quality and coverage of
those created through the dominant commercial publishing houses.

But Canadian law teachers have not yet, by and large, embraced openness
in that traditional centerpiece of the law school curriculum: the legal
casebook. Nor have they gone very far in collaborating with one another
toward that end. In this article we try to explain why, then propose a
new conceptual and practical approach to creating open casebooks in the
future.

The current lack of openness in the materials produced by and for
Canadian law teachers might seem surprising--not only in light of the
open-access movement's broader successes, but also because legal
casebooks are in some ways ideal candidates for openness. Most source
materials used in conventional law school courses--statutes,
regulations, case law and the like--are free from significant copyright
restrictions,[^4] enabling creators to avoid the high costs of
negotiating special licences or locating open alternatives to build
their courseware. Law teachers have for many years produced their own
self-published "course packs" for their students precisely because most
of the raw materials for legal education are relatively easy to access
and remix. But while the idea of open casebooks has received some recent
attention in legal education circles,[^5] in practice Canadian law
teachers will still find it difficult to locate a single open casebook
suitable to assign or adapt for most of their courses.

To be sure, there are a few excellent examples of open legal casebooks
available in Canada. But even among those examples, most if not all are
produced and maintained by one author or a small group of authors using
what appear to be standard methods and technologies for co-authorship,
rather than by alternative modes of "peer production" in which groups of
contributors flexibly build, share, and remix materials as part of
broader collaborative projects.[^6] In other words, while some existing
open casebooks are of high quality, the process of creating them seems
to track that of closed casebook authorship in most if not all
significant respects.

Focusing on the question of *how* open casebooks are created may have
significant implications for the sustainability of openness in the
future of legal education. There has been a great deal of excitement
about the potential for alternative economies of commons-based peer
production in computing, science and technology. But according to the
standard theory, legal casebooks--like other educational texts--lack
some of the key structural features of other knowledge goods, like
software or encyclopedia entries, that make them amendable to production
in peer networks.[^7] For casebooks, these missing features define the
incentive structure of production in a way that makes it difficult, if
not impossible, to build them collaboratively among any large or loosely
organized group.

Or so the conventional story goes. In this paper, we offer an
alternative account of the challenges and possibilities for building
open casebooks collaboratively. Our account tests the basic assumption
that good peer-produced texts can only be achieved through a process
designed to reach and sustain group consensus about the final product of
collaboration. Much of the existing literature on peer production
assumes that the end goal of any collaborative project is to create a
unified "knowledge object" (e.g., a book or computer application) from
the shared contributions of many participants. Our alternative approach
eschews this basic goal of consensus around core controversies in
casebook design--What does this case stand for? How should that doctrine
reconcile competing values?--and makes space for disagreement, dissent
and ultimately *disloyalty* without the need to abandon a shared
commitment to the collective project represented by the casebook as a
whole. As it turns out, this is exactly how some prominent examples of
commons-based peer production actually work in "classic" open domains
like open-source software.

In Part II of this paper, we aim to do four things. First, we apply
insights from research on knowledge commons to describe why openness
matters for legal casebooks and to detail the link between commons-based
and collaborative peer production that has largely been ignored in the
literature on openness in education. Second, we report some early data
on the incidence and form of open casebooks available for use in
Canadian law school classrooms. Third, we recount the conventional story
among scholars of peer production as to why educational texts are
difficult to sustain using non-market forms of content creation. Fourth,
we describe why this conventional story fails fully to explain the lack
of peer-produced open casebooks and we sketch our theory addressing this
gap using the two concepts of "exit" and "voice" in collaborative
casebook design.

Against this background, in Part III we explore an approach to open
casebook development that supports "disloyalty" to group consensus while
sustaining commitments to the broader common project. In order to
illustrate, we turn to the world of internet browser software as a
prominent example of the "forking" model that open-source developers
have embraced to balance exit and voice and to sustain several versions
or flavours of a shared endeavour. We then briefly describe some
practical and technological considerations for implementing our proposed
model of collaborative open casebook authorship, using a first-year
property casebook we are developing to illustrate.

# Part II: Openness in Canadian Legal Casebooks

Our empirical claims in this paper are (1) that we have seen a
relatively small number of open casebooks produced for use in Canada to
date and (2) that we can point to few, if any, examples of casebooks
created through a collaborative process of peer production. These
observations raise critical questions about the future of openness in
legal education and about whether or not we should pay closer attention
to the role of authors' motivations and incentives to engage in
non-market forms of casebook production that do not rely on exclusionary
intellectual property rights. We do not claim to answer those questions
here. Instead, we aim to situate open casebooks in the broader
discussion about commons-based peer production and evaluate how well
existing theories in that field explain the available data. Finding some
blind spots in the current theory, we go on sketch what we think is one
possible missing piece of the puzzle.

## Casebooks as Commons-Based Production

Open legal casebooks are a subset of open educational resources (OER)
produced specifically for use in law school courses. In broad terms, OER
are digital learning materials made available by their authors to others
for free, under a licence that permits copying, remixing and
redistributing the content (with varying rules about when attribution to
the original author or authors is required). Accordingly, open casebooks
are comprised of three essential components: (1) the learning content
itself (such as cases, statutes, commentary, exercises, etc), (2) the
digital tools used to develop and share that content (from simple text
files to complex content management and web-publishing systems) and (3)
the legal resources needed for implementation--namely, "copyleft"
licences, like Creative Commons,[^8] that modify the default copyright
restrictions placed on original works.[^9]

Growing interest in open casebooks is part of a broader global movement
to build resources and capacity for publishing, sharing and using OER in
a whole range of educational settings. In 2019, the General Conference
of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) emphasized the benefits of OER in a recommendation observing
that:[^10]

> the application of open licenses to educational materials introduces
> significant opportunities for more cost-effective creation, access,
> re-use, re-purpose, adaptation, redistribution, curation, and quality
> assurance of those materials, including, but not limited to
> translation, adaptation to different learning and cultural contexts,
> development of gender-sensitive materials, and the creation of
> alternative and accessible formats of materials for learners with
> special educational needs.

As the UNESCO recommendation suggests, the primary case for supporting
OER within the open access movement rests on their potential to lower or
eliminate the cost of learning materials for users and thereby increase
affordability and strengthen equality of access. As the growing cost of
learning materials outpaces even the rising costs of education
overall,[^11] OER may help students to cut their expenses substantially
and therefore improve financial access to learning environments that for
many are falling out of reach.[^12]

In the language of those who study how scientific and cultural
information is generated, the benefits of OER in terms of access and
affordability are a consequence of their production in *commons-based
system*. Commons-based knowledge production draws its inputs from the
public domain and returns its outputs back to the commons.[^13] This
model--when it can be sustained--may overcome a fundamental problem with
the market-based production of knowledge objects, which relies heavily
on exclusive intellectual property (IP) rights. As modern IP scholarship
now recognizes, information is a public good--meaning that it has the
inherent quality of being both "non-excludable" and "non-rival".[^14] In
other words, once new information has been created, there is little or
no marginal cost of *reproducing* or sharing that information among all
potential users.[^15] While producing and distributing conventional
print casebooks entails costs to the publisher arising from material
inputs, labour, shipping and so forth, there are often minimal costs
associated with sharing digital books through a digital network. From
the vantage point of neoclassical economics--where, in a competitive
market equilibrium, price equals marginal cost--the optimal price for
reproducing and sharing information that has already been created is
effectively zero.

Based on this logic, which OER advocates have long emphasized,[^16]
commons-based production of educational materials avoids the "deadweight
loss" to society that arises whenever private IP rights are afforded to
information producers. But the worry with this result, and the very
premise of modern IP, is that at zero price there is no material
incentive for *prospective* creators of intangible goods to produce them
in the first pace. While law students--and society as whole--would be
better off if existing casebooks were open to all, casebook authors may
be less inclined to write and update those books without some monetary
return to their time and effort. Contemporary IP law's response to this
worry is to afford creators a set of private property rights (such as
copyrights and patents) in the information they produce. Those rights
allow creators to exclude others from using their original works of
cultural or scientific production unless users pay some positive price
to do so.[^17]

Market-based production of educational materials therefore raises a
fundamental conflict of aims. While IP rights incentivize creation of
materials by giving authors the right to charge a positive price, the
seemingly inevitable trade-off is the deadweight social loss arising
from foregone opportunities to access the information at its marginal
cost. While advocates have rightly drawn attention to the benefits of
commons-based production of OER when freed from market-based IP rights,
they have less frequently engaged with the incentives problem that
arises for authors in the absence of a legal basis to charge for their
work. The ultimate consequence of this incentives problem may well be
the under-production of open casebooks and other forms of OER.[^18]

While OER advocates have underplayed this problem of incentives, nearly
a generation of legal scholars and economists--following Yochai
Benkler's early work in this area--have addressed the challenge at a
broader level by exploring "peer production" as an alternative model of
economic organization. Peer production refers to the creation of
informational goods within decentralized and often (though not
exclusively) large networks of participants who individually contribute
small amounts of time and effort toward a collective project. Taking
open source software (OSS), Wikipedia and various digital citizen
science initiatives as longstanding examples, advocates of peer
production claim that it represents a new structure for coordination in
the digital environment--one that can sustain commons-based models for
creating information, even in the absence of the material incentives IP
rights make possible.

The potential for peer production in domains like OSS is now well
established. But whether or not OER--and legal casebooks in
particular--are likewise amendable to peer production and therefore
sustainable over the long run is a crucial question. Unfortunately, the
answer offered by research on peer production to date has not been an
especially optimistic one. In the next section we examine the available
evidence on the number of open legal casebooks that currently exist in
the Canadian context and on the process by which those casebooks were
produced. In the following section we look at the standard theory used
to explain our results, which predicts that OER are not generally
amenable to peer production. Finally, we explain why we need to extend
this theory, along with our understanding of the challenges facing open
casebooks, in order to move toward truly sustainable models of
collaborative peer production in the legal domain.

## Evidence of Open Casebooks in Canada

The task of locating relevant OER is a well-documented problem in the
world of open education.[^19] Our attempts to build a database of open
legal casebooks in Canada reflected this challenge. There are several
digital platforms available that might potentially host an open casebook
but there is no single, centralized repository for easily locating these
materials. Moreover, existing repositories for OER often lack adequate
search and filtering tools for identifying legal casebooks specific to
the Canadian context. To our knowledge, no existing studies have
attempted to compile these data from online repositories or to produce
survey or other primary data on open casebooks in Canada for analysis.

In light of these challenges, we sought to compile an initial data set
of publicly-available information on open casebooks in Canada using two
concurrent strategies. First, we searched more than a dozen OER
repositories that we identified as capable of hosting open content for
use in Canadian law schools. Out of that initial search, we identified
one or more completed or partially completed casebooks in each of five
repositories: the Canadian Legal Information Institute (CanLII),
Pressbooks institutional repositories, H2O, BCCampus' Open Textbook
Collection, and Wikibooks.[^20] Second, we circulated a request, through
the Canadian Association of Law Librarians listserv, to law school
libraries across Canada for public information on open casebooks
produced by teachers at each school. Using these two strategies, we
gathered basic bibliographic metadata for each open casebook identified
in our search. Our resulting data set is therefore only a preliminary
one and we do not claim that it is comprehensive of all open casebooks
currently available in Canada. We note, however, that by definition open
casebooks must be publicly accessible, so any existing materials not
identified through our relatively intensive search methods might *de
facto* fall outside that definition. It is also important to clarify
that our dataset does not include other open educational materials, such
as extended syllabi or instructor guides. Our search was for material
which could be used as the primary textbook in a Canadian law course.

**Figure 1: Incidence of Open Legal Casebooks in Canada**

| Repository                            | Completed Casebooks[^21] | Unfinished Casebooks[^22] |
|----------------------|-----------------------|--------------------------|
| H2O Harvard                           | 2                        | 2                         |
| Pressbooks institutional repositories | 2                        | 0                         |
| CanLII                                | 3                        | 0                         |
| BCCampus Open Textbook Collection     | 1                        | 0                         |
| Wikibooks                             | 0                        | 14                        |
| **Total:**                            | **7**[^23]               | **16**                    |

Our final data set includes seven completed and sixteen incomplete open
legal casebooks. The completed casebooks addressed a wide range of
subject areas, from general (tort law, administrative law) to specific
(global corruption). Casebook authors were faculty members at the
University of Ottawa, the University of Victoria, the University of
Windsor, Dalhousie University, and the University of British Columbia,
although not all authors had a clear institutional affiliation.[^24]

**Figure 2: Completed Casebook Metadata**

| Title                                                                                                                  | Author(s)                                                                          | Number of Authors | Subject Matter             | Repository                                                          | Creation Platform |
|------------------------|-----------------|-----|-------|----------------|-----|
| Administrative Law 372                                                                                                 | Shannon Salter                                                                     | 1                 | Public Law                 | H2O                                                                 | H2O               |
| An Introduction to Civil Procedure: Readings                                                                           | Noah Semple                                                                        | 1                 | Civil Procedure            | CanLii                                                              | N/A               |
| Canadian Intellectual Property Law                                                                                     | Lucie Guibault, Anthony Rosborough, Haley MacLean, Tiffany Leung, and Sonja Gashus | 5                 | Intellectual Property Law  | Dalhousie University's Digital Editions Pressbooks Repository [^25] | Pressbooks        |
| Global Corruption: Its Regulation under International Conventions, US, UK, and Canadian Law and Practice (4th edition) | Gerry Ferguson                                                                     | 1                 | International Law          | BCCampus, CanLii                                                    | N/A               |
| Learning in Place: An Externship Program Coursebook                                                                    | Gemma Smyth                                                                        | 1[^26]            | Legal Externships          | eCampus Ontario's Open Library Pressbooks Repository [^27]          | Pressbooks        |
| Technology, Human Rights, and Cybersecurity                                                                            | Vivek Krishnamurthy                                                                | 1                 | Information Technology Law | H2O                                                                 | H2O               |
| Tort Law: Cases and Commentaries, 2nd ed 2022                                                                          | Samuel Beswick                                                                     | 1                 | Tort Law                   | CanLii                                                              | N/A               |

In our sample, we found little to no evidence of peer production or
other forms of collaboration or remixing among the casebooks in our data
set. Six of the seven completed casebooks were produced by a single
author. Even on the Wikibooks platform--which is specifically designed
for small decentralized contributions similar to Wikipedia--in 12 of the
14 Wikibooks, 90 percent of the text was added by one user.[^28] We
found no evidence that any casebook in our data set, complete or
incomplete, had been remixed (copied, adapted, and republished) or was
itself a "remix" of a preexisting book.

Relevant to this lack of collaborative authorship may be both the
technical capabilities of the publication platform and the licences
under which the materials are published. Among the completed casebooks
in our data set, those published on CanLII and BCCampus are available
only online or in PDF or ePub formats. Since CanLII and BCCampus are
only repositories, not open textbook creation platforms, textbooks
cannot be remixed and republished on the site itself.

By comparison, Wikibooks, Pressbooks, and H2O are all book creation
platforms as well as repositories, and therefore come with specific
functionality that make remixing and collaboration more or less possible
(see Figure 3). Wikibooks is designed for collaborative production of
textbooks based on the Wiki model: anyone can contribute to or edit an
existing book at any time. This model is designed to produce a single,
constantly-evolving iteration of a textbook; as such, it has no
in-platform features that permit remixing or publishing remixed versions
of textbooks, although Wikibooks can be downloaded as PDFs or XML files.
Pressbooks is designed for the creation of educational books and hosts a
general repository of over 3,000 texts. In addition, many different
institutions (including eCampus Ontario, AtlanticOER, Dalhousie
University, Toronto Metropolitan University, and the University of
Saskatchewan) have standalone Pressbooks networks with their own
repositories. Pressbooks features collaborative authorship tools as well
as a "cloning" tool that allows authors to copy, adapt, and republish
existing books in-platform, provided those books are published publicly
and openly licensed. However, cloning is only available within
institutional Pressbooks networks--and a single author license to use
such a network is \$500 a year.[^29]

Harvard's H2O is the only law-specific platform and repository we
searched that hosted Canadian casebooks. Designed by the Library
Innovation Lab at the Harvard Law School Library, H2O is built to
create, share, and remix open legal materials, including casebooks.[^30]
Accordingly, users can freely and easily create and remix casebooks
within the H2O platform. H2O also includes tools to facilitate the
collaborative creation of open materials. The different types of
licensing arrangements for all casebooks in our data set are described
in Figure 4.

**Figure 3: Collaboration Tools by Platform**

| Platform    | Remixing     | Publishing Remixed Versions | Multiple Collaborators |
|------------|-------------|--------------------------|----------------------|
| H2O Harvard | Yes          | Yes                         | Yes                    |
| Pressbooks  | Not for free | Not for free                | Yes                    |
| Wikibooks   | No           | No                          | Yes                    |

**Figure 4: Open Casebook by License Type**

| License Type        | Remixing Permitted              | Number of Casebooks |
|---------------------|-------------------------------|---------------------|
| CC BY-SA 3.0        | Yes                             | 12                  |
| CC BY-SA 4.0        | Yes                             | 2                   |
| CC BY-NC-SA 3.0     | Yes, for noncommercial purposes | 7                   |
| CC BY-NC-SA 4.0     | Yes, for noncommercial purposes | 1                   |
| CanLII User License | No\*                            | 1                   |
|                     |                                 |                     |

In summary, our data backs up our claim that there are few extant
examples of Canadian open legal casebooks, especially completed
casebooks ready for classroom use. The scarcity of co-authored casebooks
and casebook remixing also supports our second claim: the majority of
existing open casebooks were not created through collaborative peer
production. The broader literature on OER reflects similar findings when
it comes to the collaborative production of open materials. A review of
the literature in 2014 found "there is little empirical evidence" that
people actually revise, remix, or redistribute OER.[^31] More recent
literature suggests the rate of OER remixing, including textbook
remixing, remains low.[^32]

## Explaining Barriers to Peer Production

The data described above are consistent with the now-standard story
about why commons-based peer production is a viable alternative to
market-based models for some informational goods (like computer
software) but not for others (like educational texts). That story turns
on two core components. The first deals directly with the underlying
theory of motivations and incentives, while the second addresses
connected issues surrounding the practical structure of peer-produced
projects in terms of three characteristics: modularity, granularity and
the costs of integration.

As many scholars of peer production have pointed out, it seems obvious
from a practical standpoint that the vast majority of contributors to
successful projects like Wikipedia or Slashdot[^33] are willing to
participate even in the absence of monetary incentives made possible by
exclusionary property rights. Why then do these contributors participate
at all? Benkler theorizes that contributors to peer production are
motivated by a diverse set of non-monetary rewards. Some of these may
come in the form of personal satisfaction--for example, the satisfaction
of neatly describing a legal argument or the warm feeling generated by a
well-copy-edited text (which is unquestionably its own form of reward).
Other motivations may be social-psychological in nature, derived from
social goods like status and reputation. This latter category includes
rewards that are often imbued with cultural meaning and therefore
specific to cultural context.[^34]

Empirical research over the last few decades has largely confirmed the
idea that participants are motivated by a number of possible
non-monetary rewards. These range from "intrinsic" rewards such as
enjoyment, fun, ideology and kinship, to "extrinsic" (including
"internalized extrinsic") rewards such as own-use value (personal need),
learning new skills or knowledge, reciprocity and reputation.[^35] A
related branch of this literature has suggested that participation in
peer production is largely part of a "social practice" that develops and
is reinforced by social norms.[^36]

The second component of peer production and a key focus of research on
these processes concerns the structure of peer-produced projects
themselves. Certain structural characteristics are thought to be
necessary preconditions to peer production because they enable and
support the range of non-monetary incentives described above. Three
structural conditions have been identified and emphasized: modularity,
granularity, and costs to integration. The premise behind these
conditions is that, while non-monetary rewards may be central to
motivating participation in peer production, such rewards are unlikely
to be very large for any given contribution. This means that, for each
contribution, the costs to participation must be relatively low. Those
costs are determined, in turn, by the combined effect of modularity,
granularity and integration on individual incentives to participate.

Modularity means that the project can be broken down into smaller
components or modules that are feasible to produce independently. This
characteristic supports the basic nature of decentralized peer
production, in which participants independently select tasks to work on
without the need for centralized oversight and coordination. The second
property, granularity, refers to the size of the modules, which in turn
determines the both the relative costs of individual contributions (in
terms of time and effort) and, potentially, their relative benefits
(depending on whether more value is ascribed to larger contributions or
to a larger number of smaller contributions). In general, heterogeneous
granularity may be desirable to allow contributors with varying levels
of motivation to participate as much or as little as they like. Once
individual tasks are completed, they will--to a greater or lesser
degree--need to be integrated back into the project as a whole, raising
the possibility of integration costs. Those costs may depend on the
content of the project (e.g. narrative text vs computer code) as well as
the granularity of the modules, with finer granularity potentially
raising the costs associated with integrating a large number of discrete
pieces.

The early focus on these three properties has been confirmed by
subsequent research on peer production in a wide range of domains.[^37]
When it comes to open educational texts, Benkler notes that modularity
and granularity pose special barriers to peer production.[^38]
Educational texts are not as easy to modularize as other knowledge
objects, like encyclopedias, where topics or entries are relatively
discrete and free from the need for an overarching conceptual framework
or unifying narrative--though this problem may vary to a degree between,
say, a history text and a legal casebook. A tension also exists between
making modules fine-grained enough to attract more contributors and
ensuring the coherency of the text as a whole, which raises the costs of
integration.[^39] As Gary Matkin notes, more granularity in OER
production can be an obstacle "because it destroys the learning
context---the logical sequencing of carefully selected learning
objects".[^40] Similar concerns have been raised in related text-based
projects such as the online open library Project Gutenberg, where fine
granularity in distributed proofreading tasks led to quality problems
with the books as a whole.[^41]

Overall, the theory described above predicts that open legal casebooks
are unlikely candidates for peer production in most circumstances. That
prediction seems consistent with the empirical data we presented above.
One or a small group of law teachers might be motivated to produce an
open casebook in much the same way and based on similar motivations
applicable to other forms of scholarly output in academia. But more
diverse and decentralized collaborative casebook projects run directly
into problems of modularity, granularity and integration, ultimately
leading them to be under-produced from a social perspective. There
could, of course, be other reasons for the relatively slow pace of open
casebook development by Canadian law teachers and the non-emergence of
peer production in those casebooks in particular. For example, despite a
growing number of new platforms available for open publication, access
to suitable technology for the peer production of open casebooks has not
caught up with the needs of authors. Authors may also have limited
information about the options available. Some observers have expressed
apprehension about the credibility and quality of open publications
compared to those produced by conventional publishers.[^42] Others have
noted a lack of institutional support and recognition for open
casebooks).[^43] Inertia and convention might also play a role, creating
high switching costs for teachers that prevent them from adapting
courses long reliant on traditional casebook offerings from the major
publishers.[^44] Despite these other possible explanations, however, the
barriers posed by the need for modularity, granularity and low costs to
integration still seem considerable.

At the same time, the standard story provides an incomplete explanation
of the data on open casebooks in Canada for at least two reasons. First,
while the problems of modularity, granularity and integration will be
particularly acute for large-scale, highly-decentralized casebook
projects where fine-grained modules are needed to attract a large number
of contributors, it is not as clear that these dynamics are prohibitive
for more modest-scale projects with a smaller number of contributors and
certain degree of centralized administration. Second, because these
problems have been well recognized in the OER context, several technical
platforms have emerged over the past decade to start to address them,
making it easier to achieve a certain level of modularity and reducing
integration costs.[^45] Research on the use of these platforms has begun
to develop evaluative frameworks that emphasize a technology's ability
to address three interrelated challenges in the context of OER.[^46]

## Voice and Exit in Casebook Development

Explaining the current status of open legal casebooks in Canada requires
going beyond the conventional story about peer production and its
particular emphasis on the costs of modularity, granularity and
integration. Our goal in this section is to propose an extension of the
conventional story that may help to explain why so few open casebooks
are being produced collaboratively. Building on Albert Hirschman's work,
this story underscores what we call "voice" as a significant but
underappreciated factor motivating law teachers to contribute to a
collective casebook, along with the interrelationship between voice and
possibilities for "exit" from the project in the face of irreconcilable
disagreements or a lack of group consensus about core aspects of the
project.[^47]

The concept of "voice" in open casebook production arises from the
problem that most commercial casebooks are highly generic with respect
to core questions of pedagogical design. To be sure, it is possible to
glean certain choices by casebook authors about their conceptual
approach to a course or about why they included certain materials based
on overall organization, more or less explicit notes in the text, or
perhaps an accompanying teaching guide. But the very constraints of
market-based production under exclusive IP rights dictate that
commercial casebooks, like commercial textbooks in general, must appeal
to teachers with a broad range of preferences and perspectives.[^48]
While different casebooks may compete on different coverage of subject
matter, doctrine or case selection, they rarely offer conceptual or
pedagogical approaches directed explicitly to particular audiences. The
way around this problem for most law teachers is to publish a detailed
syllabus that curates content from an assigned casebook, supplemented by
other materials available either online or by way of fair dealing
exceptions to copyrighted material. For example, in a study of Canadian
contract law professors, Sandomierski found that over one-third of those
surveyed assigned supplementary materials in their courses. He argues
that this shows a perception among a significant proportion of
instructors that "\[commercial\] casebooks...focus on a dogmatic core at
the expense of critical perspectives".[^49]

The generic nature of most conventional casebooks readily masks the very
real choices that law teachers necessarily make in designing and
delivering their courses. Most, if not all, law teachers will likely
have deeply-held beliefs about what material should be taught in their
courses and about how that material should be addressed.[^50] What often
goes unnoticed in a world dominated by commercial casebooks is that most
of those beliefs are only minimally and imperfectly expressed by the
choice of which casebook to adopt. This point is of course well
appreciated by those teachers who devote much time and effort to
creating their own custom "course packs". These teacher-authors
implicitly recognize the value associated with having one's
*voice*--meaning the full expression of one's personal, political and
pedagogical goals and beliefs--clearly reflected in the materials that
comprise the core of the courses they teach.

Emerging research on OER use in general supports this point. In a study
of incentives and barriers to OER adoption in the United States, faculty
cited the ability to adapt OER materials to suit their particular
teaching needs as one perceived benefit of using OER.[^51] Another study
found that the ability to customize and (re)design course materials can
improve teachers' pedagogy by shifting them "from serving
as *deliverers* of publisher-designed content to embracing their own
authority as *curators* of open content that they have discovered,
organized, and/or created with specific needs in mind".[^52] Similarly,
a study of OER use in Columbia found that "teachers create and use OER
more effectively" when they receive support which allows them to have
"an active role in the creation and recreation of knowledge".[^53]

Unfortunately, the costs of producing a legal casebook that fully
expresses one's voice but which rivals commercial offerings in quality
and coverage imposes high costs that are likely insurmountable for many.
Those costs highlight the potential of collaborative open casebook
authorship and opportunities for participating authors to exercise a
voice in casebook design and creation without bearing the full burden of
developing the project on their own.

The concept of "voice" therefore captures an important motivation for
participating in open casebook authorship beyond either material
compensation or other forms of non-material reward described in the
literature on peer production. We suggest that this idea has largely
been overlooked by those who study peer production because of the
emphasis on what Haythornthwaite has called "light-weight peer
production", in which relatively small contributions to a project are
perceived as one-offs and therefore mostly preclude any deeper,
sustained commitment to having one's voice reflected in the final
product.[^54] By contrast, "heavy-weight peer production" occurs when
group members invest significant time and resources in the success of
the project on an ongoing basis.

If voice is indeed an important motivation for collaborative casebook
authors, it must be understood in relationship to the relative costs of
"exit" from a collective project, by which we mean the costs associated
with ceasing to take part in the group collaboration after making some
level of investment in the project. In Hirschman's popular formulation,
exit and voice serve as alternative but interrelated options for
responding to dissatisfaction among members of a group (whether they are
participants in a specific organization or project, or customers of a
particular firm).[^55] Exit and voice can serve as substitutes for one
another: for example, when consumers have alternative options to either
complain about poor product quality (voice) or to switch to a competing
product (exit). But Hirschman went on to observe that these options can,
in some circumstances, also be mutually reinforcing. When low-cost exit
is available, firm managers may face greater incentives to respond to
the needs of their consumers.

Translated to the context of collaborative casebook authorship,
Hirschman's insight implies that the costs of exit from a group project
can dramatically influence the consequences of disagreement among
members of the group. At one extreme, some casebook projects offer no
opportunity for exit. This is, in effect, the situation with respect to
conventional commercial casebooks. Co-authors of those casebooks cannot
generally take their contributions to the project and leave in the face
of any disagreement: they must either pre-commit on all issues of
potential contention (assuming those could be known in advance), or they
must resolve those issues by mutual consensus as they occur. This
problem is diminished to some extent in the production of open casebooks
where--by definition--the collective work product of the group is
governed by an open license, such that any contributor who wishes to
exit the group can take the casebook with them and continue to modify or
update it as suits their needs and aims \[Matthew Bodie[^56], 74-5
refers to this as the "uniform/varigated" dichotomy in peer production;
Bodie recognized that open legal casebooks might be produced without
consensus about the final product but he does not address the problem of
exit costs.\]. However, while this mode of exit is costless at the point
of exit, it raises increasing costs over time as the dissenting author
is now in the position of having to update and maintain their particular
version of the project without the help of other contributors. We
might--recalling the significance of integration costs in research on
peer production--call these *disintegration costs* facing the exiting
author.[^57]

When such disintegration costs are too high it may be difficult to
elicit participation from would-be contributors. If contributors are
unable to exit the project in a way that allows them to continue
capturing the value of their and others' contributions in the future,
they will face significant disincentives to participate in the first
place. In this sense, as Hirschman observed, exit and voice are mutually
reinforcing. While the nature of open casebooks means that exit costs
among participants are lower than for conventional closed casebooks,
these costs may still be high enough to deter active participation in
peer-produced projects.

On the other hand, Hirschman also recognized that the costs of exit from
a group might conceivably be too low. When exit cost are minimal--for
example, when switching to a new product is relatively
easy--contributors may have little incentive to exercise voice in the
first place. This situation may characterize reasonably well
Haythornthwaite's category of light-weight peer production, in which
contributors feel little attachment to the collective project, engage
mainly on a one-off basis and bear little cost if they decide to stop
participating, and therefore have minimal motivation to exercise or
value voice in this context.

The theory we have sketched above extends the conventional story about
when peer production may be difficult in the context of open casebooks
and other forms of OER. Whereas the conventional story emphasizes the
problems of modularity, granularity and integration as a set of "entry"
conditions for participating in peer production, our perspective urges
more attention to the "exit" conditions that face prospective
contributors down the road, when collaborating authors inevitably
confront disagreement and conflict in the face of strongly held beliefs
about various aspects of law school pedagogy. At this point, we have
said little about the variables that might influence these costs of exit
and, reciprocally, the benefits of voice. We discuss some of these
variables in Part III, where we explore the application of our theory in
practice.

# Part III: Consensus and Disloyalty in Open Casebooks

If we are right about the role of voice and exit in structuring
incentives to peer produce open casebooks, is there a model of casebook
development that can help to make exit and voice mutually reinforcing in
this context? In other words, is there a way to reduce the costs of exit
enough to circumvent the need for consensus, without lowering them so
much that there is little incentive to sustain the collective project at
all?

To answer this question we revisit the world of open source software
(OSS) that has so often served as a archetype for peer production. But
whereas the standard analysis of peer production has emphasized OSS
mainly for its ability to overcome the challenges of modularity,
granularity and integration, we turn to OSS in order to explore the ways
in which software developers have sometimes achieved an equilibrium
between voice and exit and thereby realised what we call "disloyalty" to
certain projects that persist even in the absence of a consensus about
some of its core components and aims.

## Forking, Disloyalty and the Contemporary Web Browser

Web browsers--the software used to navigate the visual internet--are a
ubiquitous part of everyday digital life. While many internet users
probably give little thought to which browser they use, for those who
care to dwell on this question there is a remarkable range of choice
among the several free alternatives that currently dominate the browser
market. Those different alternatives address a range of different
priorities for users. Some popular browsers emphasize privacy, while
others focus on speed. Still others promote their ability to integrate
with other software applications or their flexibility toward user
customization and experience.

The diversity in both design and the driving philosophies behind the
internet's most popular web browsers represents an undeniable lack of
consensus among those who produce browser software about what
constitutes a "good" product. This situation alone would be unremarkable
if today's leading browsers were simply competing products in the
broader web browser market. But the process of producing this software
does not resemble normal market production at all. Instead, nearly all
popular web browsers today are what software developers call a
"fork"--that is, an offshoot or branch of the central, collaborative
open software initiative known as the "Chromium Projects."

The Chromium Projects began in 2008, when Google released their new web
browser called Chrome--and at the same time, publicly released all the
code for the browser as an open source project called Chromium. At the
time of this release, Google stated that they made the code open source
both to allow other people to improve Chromium's code and to facilitate
the creation of other projects based on that code.[^58] Since 2008, the
Chromium source code has remained available to anyone to copy, remix and
redistribute for free. And, as Google intended, Chromium was quickly
used for other projects, becoming the base for most of Chrome's leading
web browser competitors including Opera, Brave, Vivaldi, and Microsoft
Edge.[^59] As of May 2022, Chromium-based browsers made up over
two-thirds of the browser market share worldwide.[^60]

The structure of modern web browser development is therefore a prominent
example of peer production, but one with an important twist. Chromium
itself operates along the lines of "normal" OSS development, with a
range of different software developers contributing to building,
reviewing and updating the project's source code. What makes the project
significant is that, from a larger perspective, it encompasses a
community of developers and users who both contribute to that core
project (or "trunk") while sustaining long-term dissent about some of
its most important features in the form of a practice called "forking"
(or "branching"). In the realm of open source software, forking occurs
when a software's source code is copied, modified, and then used as the
basis for an alternative version of the original.[^61] The new fork
"begins life as a copy...and moves on from there, generating its own
history".[^62] Because the code is open-source, creating a new fork does
not require the original developer's permission or consent.

The practice of forking effectively offers anyone who disagrees with
certain features of an open source project the opportunity for low-cost
exit. In the most extreme case, a developer might create a new fork and
simply exit the original community of developers altogether--leaving
them free to realize their divergent vision.[^63] But in other cases,
creating a fork is a means of only *partial* exit from the original
project, with dissenters maintaining the ability to "update" their forks
with subsequent changes and improvements made to the trunk, as well as
the option to contribute their own innovations back to the original
project. This process essentially describes the way that much of
contemporary web browser development works.

By copying and then modifying Chromium's code, different development
teams create unique code forks. When Chromium's code is updated,
developers can integrate the updated code into their own fork to ensure
the merged code runs smoothly and their own software stays current.[^64]
These forks result in different browser softwares and thus different
user experiences: Vivaldi touts its full customization to users
needs,[^65] Microsoft Edge calls itself "the best browser for
Windows",[^66] and Brave states that it's "on a mission to protect your
privacy online".[^67] The existence of multiple Chromium forks means
there is no need for software developers (or users) to come to a
consensus on what makes the "best" web browser. This model of peer
production stands in stark contrast to other open projects---like
Wikipedia--that resolve conflicts by building and enforcing group
consensus.[^68]

What Chromium-based developers appear to have achieved, if imperfectly,
is a model of disloyalty in which the option for exit serves to
reinforce rather than detract from the expression of voice. Changes to
the Chromium code base come from developers at Google but they are also
contributed from individuals outside the company,[^69] including by
developers who work on other Chromium-based browsers. For instance,
Microsoft (whose browser Microsoft Edge is a direct competitor for
Google Chrome) accounted for 35% of non-Google contributions to Chromium
in 2020.[^70] Vivaldi developers chose to use Chromium's code base in
part because of these outside contributions, which allowed them to
"benefit from code improvements many developers--including
ourselves--report and upstream \[i.e., contribute back to the Chromium's
code\]".[^71]

## Practicing Disloyalty in Open Casebooks

A key question for law teachers interested in the future of "open" is
whether the model of disloyalty in web browsers that we have just
described can be applied or adapted to build open casebooks
collaboratively. We think that it can. In this section, we move beyond
our theoretical discussion to describe how we are developing the
disloyalty model in practice to build and revise an open-source property
law casebook for use in Canadian first-year law school courses, entitled
*Land and Property in Canada's Political Economy*.[^72]

The motivation for one of us (Baxter) to begin writing an open property
law casebook is well captured by the concept of voice described above.
Several commercial casebooks on Canadian property law are comprehensive
(at least with respect to Anglo-Canadian legal sources), but each lacks
a substantial and explicit conceptual foundation that makes it possible
for students to develop critical understandings of the material in a
comprehensive way. Baxter's research interests in both the history and
the political economy of legal institutions motivated a first
experimental version of *Land and Property*, created during a sabbatical
year, for use in his first-year property course in 2020-21.[^73] The
result was a product of sole authorship, not peer production. A
subsequent version of the casebook, now under development, is being
redesigned by the authors of this paper explicitly to address the
challenges and possibilities for collaborative development we previously
described. Among other things, this redesign aims to ensure that anyone
can quickly and easily edit, add, remove, or reorder the casebook's
modularized content to produce their own version of *Land and Property*
by creating a fork of the original. These forks could produce versions
in which the difference is as small as a reworded sentence or a new
case, or as large as an entire chapter--all while sustaining the
possibility of integrating future changes to the original into the new
fork, or from the fork back into the original.

Whether or not the *Land and Property* project will ultimately attract
other collaborators among those who teach property law in Canada and
achieve a form of sustainable commons-based peer production like that
seen in modern web browsers remains to be seen. What the project offers
at this stage is not a successful example of collaborative development,
but an evolving assemblage of ideas and tools for practicing disloyalty
in casebook design. In this section, we will defer a thick description
of the technical details of that project to a separate article and focus
on briefly explaining why the ideas and tools we are adopting make the
casebook uniquely positioned to support collaborative authorship in line
with the theory described in Part II.

The central approach behind the *Land and Property* project can be
summed up in the adage that we advocate writing "casebooks as code". For
the most part, this means that we have abandoned the longstanding
practice of drawing high-level analogies between OER production and open
software development. Instead, we have started to adopt more of the
actual, everyday practices and technologies of software developers
themselves.

This idea of law professors with no experience in the computer sciences
writing "code" is not as far-fetched as it might sound. In fact, it
mirrors a broader trend among non-programmer writers within the OSS
sector itself who produce technical documentation for software projects
(such as the FAQs and help files that explain to users how to use a
particular program). For most of computing history, these "docs" were
created using standard tools and processes for technical documentation,
such that manuals for open software were written in much the same way as
manuals for toasters. But over the last decade or so, a small group of
writers began to realize that they could employ some of the very same
tools and processes in their work as those used by their programmer
colleagues who develop the software itself. This approach to authoring
documentation became known as writing "docs as code" and has led to a
flourishing ecosystem of collaborative technical authorship.[^74]

The details of these tools and processes adopted by technical writers
are beyond the scope of this paper, but in general they rest on two
foundations of all contemporary OSS development that make the disloyalty
model we described above achievable in practice. The first is writing in
*source code*. Source code is essentially a set of instructions and
associated commentary written by programmers in one of several possible
text-based computer languages. All collaborations between OSS developers
happen at the level of source code, its most important feature being
that it is understandable not only by a computer (which "compiles" the
code into a working application), but also by any human being who is
proficient in the language.[^75] Source code is a unified means of
communication, within a computing system, between all participants in
that system, both human and machine.

Casebook "source code" looks much different than computer code (and much
less confusing to the lay reader). The *Land and Property* casebook is
essentially a collection of plain text files, with minimal markup, that
anyone can read and understand having learned a few basic rules. This
approach is strictly content-focused: casebook authors work directly on
the source code content but do not need to worry about formatting or
design. The source code is then "compiled", at a later stage, for output
to particular media (e.g., digital, print, or both).

In creating *Land and Property*, we therefore abandoned now-standard
practices of working with visual website builders or conventional
desktop word processing applications and returned to the basics of
writing text. While this will appear to many a banal, technical detail,
it is difficult to overstate the importance of such a shift for
realizing our model of disloyalty. The move to writing casebook source
code makes possible the second foundational element of "casebooks as
code": *source control*. Those who have been involved in multi-author
writing projects will be familiar with the process of co-producing a
document using "track changes" in Microsoft Word or Google Docs. While
useful for limited works with a small number of authors, these tools are
clearly inadequate for managing complex projects with many decentralized
contributors and offer no way to sustain the durable "forks" that are
essential to the disloyalty model used in modern web browsers. OSS
developer communities working with computer source code have created
vastly more sophisticated systems for version control that make
Chromium--and indeed, all open source software--possible. These systems
enable a mode of collaboration facilitated by a multi-versional
representation of content as a range of snapshots. These snapshots are
updated every time a user saves a different state of source code".[^76]
Imagine, in other words, that every change to a casebook--no matter how
small--is captured and remembered by the system, making it possible to
branch off from the existing content at any point in its history.

Because casebook and computer source code share the essential feature of
being text-based, the same system for version control can--in theory--be
used to manage either type of complex collaboration. Most current
platforms available for open casebook production store information in
inaccessible databases that make sharing and remixing difficult or
nearly impossible. The casebooks-as-code approach dramatically
simplifies how this information is stored and thereby makes accessing
and using it for real collaboration eminently more feasible.

To illustrate, consider a brief example. Suppose that a dozen property
law professors across the country express an interest in developing the
original content of the *Land and Property*. Using the system of version
control described above, each contributor could make a copy of the
existing content, make changes or additions, then suggest those back to
original. Such an exercise would of course require some decision-making
or *governance* structure to determine which changes to accept or
reject. On its own, this process might be manageable using conventional
tools for casebook authorship (though likely not as the number of
participants increases). But now imagine that one of the contributors,
who's suggested change has been rejected by the group, decides to create
their own fork of the *Land and Property* project. As with modern web
browsers, the system for version control that we have described enables
this dissenter to pursue their own changes, while sustaining the ability
to automatically "update" their version with subsequent changes to other
aspects of the original. The disloyal fork carves out its own
distinctive identity from group consensus, while maintaining an ongoing
relationship as that group consensus itself evolves.[^77]

None of this is to suggest that law professors interested in open
authorship will or should need to go to great lengths to learn new tools
and processes for creating their casebooks. Indeed, the spectre of such
high fixed costs to participation would surely outweigh any benefits of
voice or otherwise. Reducing those costs has been a significant feature
of our current work on the *Land and Property* project. But we are
comforted by the fact that our optimism about the potential for
casebooks as code is shared by technologists who think broadly about the
future of content generation and management on the web as a whole:[^78]

> Imagine going to a website and spotting a typo, clicking an edit
> button, fixing the issue, and submitting the change to the website
> owners for approval. Or to take it a step further: the same workflow,
> but you're writing a guest blog post or generating entirely new pages
> of content that you feel is missing. These workflows won't just
> transform content creation on the web. They can also apply to writing
> a book, academic writing, print media ... the list goes on.

We imagine a future where multiple, constantly-evolving forks of
collaborative casebook projects exist, created by law professors across
the country (or around the world) who have the tools to continually
adapt their versions to suit their unique voices, all while continuing
to contribute to the core project. At the same time, we acknowledge that
the practical tools to support such collaborations are still in their
early days. Working at the edge of technological and conceptual
development in this area comes with a certain level of uncertainty and
it will not be for everyone, at least for now. But for some, the
potential both for collective action and for realizing the voices of
diverse authors--aligned with the increased affordability and
accessibility promised by open casebooks--will be well worth the
experimental effort, with all that this entails for a more equitable
distribution of power and resources in legal education.

\pagebreak

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body">

<div id="ref-gentle2017docs" class="csl-entry">

Gentle, Anne, *Docs like code* (Morrisville, NC: Lulu Press, 2017).

</div>

<div id="ref-hirschman1970exit" class="csl-entry">

Hirschman, Albert O, *Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in
Firms, Organizations, and States* (Harvard University Press, 1970).

</div>

<div id="ref-litman2006DigitalCopyright" class="csl-entry">

Litman, Jessica, *Digital copyright*, pbk. ed ed (Amherst, N.Y:
Prometheus Books, 2006).

</div>

<div
id="ref-organisationforeconomicco-operationanddevelopment2007GivingKnowledgeFree"
class="csl-entry">

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, *Giving
knowledge for free: The emergence of open educational resources* (Paris:
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2007).

</div>

<div id="ref-rubin2012LegalEducationDigital" class="csl-entry">

Rubin, Edward L, *[Legal Education in the Digital
Age](http://ezproxy.library.dal.ca/login?url=https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=e000xna&AN=443691&site=ehost-live)*
(Cambridge \[UK\]: Cambridge University Press, 2012).

</div>

<div id="ref-sandomierski2020AspirationRealityLegal" class="csl-entry">

Sandomierski, David, *Aspiration and Reality in Legal Education*
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2020).

</div>

<div id="ref-weller2014BattleOpen" class="csl-entry">

Weller, Martin, *The battle for open* (London: Ubiquity Press, 2014).

</div>

<div id="ref-anderson2019StrategiesSupportingOER" class="csl-entry">

Anderson, Talea & Chelsea Leachman, "[Strategies for Supporting OER
Adoption through Faculty and Instructor Use of a Federated Search
Tool](https://doi.org/10.7710/2162-3309.2279)" (2019) 7 Journal of
Librarianship and Scholarly Communication.

</div>

<div id="ref-arrow1962EconomicWelfareAllocation" class="csl-entry">

Arrow, Kenneth J, "Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for
invention" in Richard Nelson, ed, *The Rate and Direction of Inventive
Activity: Economic and Social Factors* (Princeton University Press,
1962) 609.

</div>

<div id="ref-belikov2016IncentivesBarriersOER" class="csl-entry">

Belikov, Olga Maria & Robert Bodily, "[Incentives and barriers to OER
adoption: A qualitative analysis of faculty
perceptions](https://doi.org/10.5944/openpraxis.8.3.308)" (2016) 8:3, 3
Open Praxis 235--246.

</div>

<div
id="ref-bencollins-sussmanbrianw.fitzpatrickc.michaelpilatoChapterBranchingMerging"
class="csl-entry">

Ben Collins-Sussman, Brian W Fitzpatrick, C Michael Pilato, "[Chapter 4:
Branching and Merging](https://svnbook.red-bean.com/en/1.7/index.html)"
in *Version Control with Subversion: For Subversion 17*.

</div>

<div id="ref-benkler2002CoasePenguinLinux" class="csl-entry">

Benkler, Yochai, "Coase's penguin, or, linux and" the nature of the
firm"" (2002) Yale Law Journal.

</div>

<div id="ref-binford2013EnvisioningTwentyFirstCentury"
class="csl-entry">

Binford, W Warren H, "[Envisioning a Twenty-First Century Legal
Education New Ideas in Law and Legal
Education](https://heinonline.org/HOL/P?h=hein.journals/wajlp43&i=165)"
(2013) 43 Wash U J L & Pol'y 157--186.

</div>

<div id="ref-bodie2013CollaborationCommunityLabor" class="csl-entry">

Bodie, Matthew, "Collaboration and community: The labor law group and
the future of labor and employment casebooks" (2013) 58 Louis ULJ 61.

</div>

<div id="ref-bodie2007FutureCasebookArgument" class="csl-entry">

---------, "The future of the casebook: An argument for an open-source
approach" (2007) 57 J Legal Educ 10.

</div>

<div id="ref-chen2019HowEmpoweringCitizen" class="csl-entry">

Chen, Shun-Ling, "[How Empowering Is Citizen Science? Access, Credits,
and Governance for the Crowd](https://muse.jhu.edu/article/727243)"
(2019) 13:2 East Asian Science, Technology and Society: an International
Journal 215--234.

</div>

<div id="ref-colvard2018ImpactOpenEducational" class="csl-entry">

Colvard, Nicholas B, C Edward Watson & Hyojin Park, "The Impact of Open
Educational Resources on Various Student Success Metrics" (2018) 30:2
International Journal of Teaching and Learning in Higher Education 15.

</div>

<div id="ref-crawford2019PhilanthropyMillennialAge" class="csl-entry">

Crawford, Elizabeth Crisp & Jeremy Jackson, "Philanthropy in the
Millennial Age: Trends toward Polycentric Personalized Philanthropy"
(2019) 23:4 Independent Review 551--568.

</div>

<div id="ref-cummings2019beyond" class="csl-entry">

Cummings, Mark, "Beyond affordability" (2019) 31:1 Against the Grain 15.

</div>

<div id="ref-duguid2006LimitsSelfOrganizationPeer" class="csl-entry">

Duguid, Paul, "[Limits of Self-Organization: Peer Production and 'Laws
of Quality'](https://doi.org/10.5210/fm.v11i10.1405)" (2006) 11:10 First
Monday.

</div>

<div id="ref-ehlers2011ExtendingTerritoryOpen" class="csl-entry">

Ehlers, Ulf-Daniel, "Extending the territory: From open educational
resources to open educational practices" (2011) 15:2 Journal of open,
flexible and distance learning 1--10.

</div>

<div id="ref-ertas2020OperationalFrameworkOnline" class="csl-entry">

Ertas, Hulya, Burak Pak & Caroline Newton, "An operational framework for
an online community based on the commons, dissensus and shared
knowledge" (2020) 2 Postdigital Science and Education 397--415.

</div>

<div id="ref-fazzino2019RemixingOpenEducational" class="csl-entry">

Fazzino, Lusiella & Julie Turley, "[Remixing an Open Educational
Resource: A Case Study of the Uncommon
'R'](https://academicworks.cuny.edu/ulj/vol25/iss1/3)" (2019) 25:1 Urban
Library Journal.

</div>

<div id="ref-feller2005MotivationFreeOpen" class="csl-entry">

Feller, Joseph et al, "[Motivation in Free/Open Source Software
Development](https://web-s-ebscohost-com.ezproxy.library.dal.ca/ehost/ebookviewer/ebook/ZTAwMHhuYV9fMTM4NDY5X19BTg2?sid=9f009c84-4e05-49eb-a81d-6b4e12299d3d@redis&vid=0&format=EB&lpid=lp_1&rid=0)"
in *Perspectives on Free and Open Source Software* (Cambrdige,
Massachussetts: The MIT Press, 2005) 1.

</div>

<div id="ref-fromer2012ExpressiveIncentivesIntellectual"
class="csl-entry">

Fromer, Jeanne C, "[Expressive Incentives in Intellectual
Property](https://heinonline.org/HOL/P?h=hein.journals/valr98&i=1785)"
(2012) 98:8 Va L Rev 1745--1824.

</div>

<div id="ref-henderson2014CrowdsourcedCoursebooks" class="csl-entry">

Henderson, Stephen E & Joseph Thai, "Crowdsourced coursebooks" (2014)
51:4 Alta L Rev 907--924.

</div>

<div id="ref-jhangiani2017InvestigatingPerceptionsUse"
class="csl-entry">

Jhangiani, Rajiv Sunil & Surita Jhangiani, "[Investigating the
Perceptions, Use, and Impact of Open Textbooks: A survey of
Post-Secondary Students in British
Columbia](https://doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v18i4.3012)" (2017) 18:4 The
International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning.

</div>

<div id="ref-johnson2014TeachingTomorrowUtilizing" class="csl-entry">

Johnson, Stephen, "Teaching for Tomorrow: Utilizing Technology to
Implement the Reforms of MacCrate, Carnegie, and Best Practices" (2014)
92:1 Nebraska Law Review 46--85.

</div>

<div id="ref-johnson2016CourseSourceCasebook" class="csl-entry">

Johnson, Stephen M, "The course source: The casebook evolved" (2016) 44
Cap UL Rev 591.

</div>

<div id="ref-kapczynski2011cost" class="csl-entry">

Kapczynski, Amy, "The cost of price: Why and how to get beyond
intellectual property internalism" (2011) 59 UCLA L Rev 970.

</div>

<div id="ref-vonkrogh2012CarrotsRainbowsMotivation" class="csl-entry">

Krogh, Georg von et al, "[Carrots and Rainbows: Motivation and Social
Practice in Open Source Software
Development](https://doi.org/10.2307/41703471)" (2012) 36:2 MIS
Quarterly 649--676.

</div>

<div id="ref-lenz2020AffordableContentLegal" class="csl-entry">

Lenz, Connie, "Affordable content in legal education" (2020) 112:3 Law
Libr J 301--325.

</div>

<div id="ref-mariadelpilarsaenzrodriguez2017CocreationOERTeachers"
class="csl-entry">

María del Pilar Sáenz Rodríguez, Ulises Hernandez Pino & Yoli Marcela
Hernández, "[Co-creation of OER by teachers and teacher educators in
Colombia](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.604384)" in *Adoption and
Impact of OER in the Global South, edited by Cheryl Hodgkinson-Williams
and Patricia B Arinto* (Cape Town & Ottawa: African Minds, International
Development Research Centre & Research on Open Educational Resources,
2017).

</div>

<div id="ref-matkin2012OpeningHigherEducation" class="csl-entry">

Matkin, Gary W, "[The Opening of Higher
Education](https://www.jstor.org/stable/23594892)" (2012) 44:3 Change
6--13.

</div>

<div id="ref-mccabe2015FollowingHerdBringing" class="csl-entry">

McCabe, Jeremy J, "[Following the Herd: Bringing Electronic Casebooks
into the Law
School](https://heinonline.org/HOL/P?h=hein.journals/lgrefsq34&i=197)"
(2015) 34:3 Legal Reference Services Q 196--238.

</div>

<div id="ref-mcgreal2016OpenEducationalResources" class="csl-entry">

McGreal, Rory, Terry Anderson & Conrad, Dianne, "[Open educational
resources in
Canada](https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000368327)" in Miao,
Fengchun, Mishra, Sanjaya & McGreal, Rory, eds, *Open Educational
Resources: Policy, Costs and Transformation* (Paris: UNESCO, 2016) 63.

</div>

<div id="ref-miller2015" class="csl-entry">

Miller, Joseph Scott & Lydia Pallas Loren, "The idea of the casebook:
Pedagogy, prestige, and trusty platforms" (2015) 11 Wash JL Tech & Arts
31.

</div>

<div id="ref-moglen1999FreeSoftwareDeath" class="csl-entry">

Moglen, Eben, "Free software and the death of copyright" (1999) 4:8
First Monday.

</div>

<div id="ref-nagashima2021MotivatingFactorsUniversity"
class="csl-entry">

Nagashima, Tomohiro & Susan Hrach, "[Motivating Factors among University
Faculty for Adopting Open Educational Resources: Incentives
Matter](https://doi.org/10.5334/jime.678)" (2021) 2021:1, 1 Journal of
Interactive Media in Education 19.

</div>

<div id="ref-ostrom2015PublicGoodsPublic" class="csl-entry">

Ostrom, Vincent & Elinor Ostrom, "Public goods and public choices" in
Daniel H Cole & Michael D McGinnis, eds, *Elinor Ostrom and the
Bloomington School of Political Economy: Volume 2, Resource Governance*
(Lanham: Lexington Books, 2015) 3.

</div>

<div id="ref-rodriguez-solano2015CreationReusableOpen"
class="csl-entry">

Rodriguez-Solano, Carlos, Salvador Sánchez-Alonso & Miguel-Angel
Sicilia, "[Creation of reusable open textbooks: Insights from the
Connexions repository](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12196)" (2015) 46:6
British Journal of Educational Technology 1223--1235.

</div>

<div id="ref-rullani2013PeripheryStageIntraorganizational"
class="csl-entry">

Rullani, Francesco & Stefan Haefliger, "[The periphery on stage: The
intra-organizational dynamics in online communities of
creation](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.10.008)" (2013) 42:4
Research Policy 941--953.

</div>

<div id="ref-silveira2013DigitalEcosystemCollaborative"
class="csl-entry">

Silveira, Ismar Frango et al, "[A Digital Ecosystem for the
Collaborative Production of Open Textbooks: The LATIn
Methodology](https://doi.org/10.28945/1888)" (2013) 12 Journal of
Information Technology Education Research 228--249.

</div>

<div id="ref-spaeth2021UserMotivationsPeer" class="csl-entry">

Spaeth, Sebastian, Christian Penzold & Sophie Toupin, "User Motivations
in Peer Production" in Matthieu O'Neil, Toupin, Sophie & Pentzold,
Christian, eds, *The Handbook of Peer Production* (Hoboken, New York:
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2021) 1.

</div>

<div id="ref-triantis2013ImprovingContractQuality" class="csl-entry">

Triantis, George G, "[Improving Contract Quality: Modularity,
Technology, and Innovation in Contract
Design](http://ezproxy.library.dal.ca/login?url=https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=bth&AN=114920108&site=ehost-live)"
(2013) 18:2 Stanford Journal of Law, Business & Finance 177--214.

</div>

<div id="ref-tuomi2013OpenEducationalResources" class="csl-entry">

Tuomi, Ilkka, "[Open Educational Resources and the Transformation of
Education](https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12019)" (2013) 48:1 European
Journal of Education 58--78.

</div>

<div id="ref-wang2019MotivationGovernanceEfficacy" class="csl-entry">

Wang, Rong, "[Motivation, governance, efficacy and contribution: A
social practice model of commons-based peer
production](https://ideas.repec.org/a/ids/ijnvor/v20y2019i3p245-264.html)"
(2019) 20:3 International Journal of Networking and Virtual
Organisations 245--264.

</div>

<div id="ref-wiley2014OpenEducationalResources" class="csl-entry">

Wiley, David, TJ Bliss & Mary McEwen, "Open educational resources: A
review of the literature" in J Michael Spector et al, eds, *Handbook of
Research on Educational Communications and Technology* (New York:
Springer, 2014) 781.

</div>

<div id="ref-wood2022OpenYourCasebooks" class="csl-entry">

Wood, Emma & Misty Peltz-Steele, "Open your casebooks please:
Identifying alternatives to Langdell's legacy" (2022) 43:1 Western New
England Law Review.

</div>

<div id="ref-CanLIIWebsiteTerms" class="csl-entry">

"CanLII Website Terms of Use", online:
\<<https://www.canlii.org/en/info/terms.html>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-CopyrightPermissionReproduce" class="csl-entry">

"Copyright/Permission to Reproduce", online:
\<<https://www.bccourts.ca/Privacy%20Statement.html>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-CourtsNovaScotia" class="csl-entry">

"Courts of Nova Scotia Copyright Policy", online:
\<<https://courts.ns.ca/General_Content/copyright_pop_up.htm>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-2021PolicyCopyrightLegal" class="csl-entry">

"Policy on copyright on legal materials", (25 November 2021), online:
\<<http://www.ontario.ca/page/copyright-information-c-queens-printer-ontario>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-PressbooksSelfPublishers" class="csl-entry">

"Pressbooks For Self Publishers", online:
\<<https://pressbooks.com/self-publishers/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-askin2020EnvironmentalScanOpen" class="csl-entry">

Askin, Nicole et al, *[Environmental Scan of Open Education Service and
Support in
Canada](https://www.carl-abrc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/OEWG_environmental_scan_eng.pdf)*,
by Nicole Askin et al (Canadian Association of Research Libraries,
2020).

</div>

<div id="ref-atlanticoerCatalog" class="csl-entry">

AtlanticOER, "Catalog", online:
\<<https://caul-cbua.pressbooks.pub/catalog/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-bccampusFindOpenTextbooks" class="csl-entry">

BCCampus, "Find Open Textbooks", online:
\<<https://open.bccampus.ca/browse-our-collection/find-open-textbooks/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-bengoodger2008WelcomeChromium" class="csl-entry">

Ben Goodger, "Welcome to Chromium", (2 September 2008), online:
\<<https://blog.chromium.org/2008/09/welcome-to-chromium_02.html>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-benkler2005CommonWisdomPeer" class="csl-entry">

Benkler, Yochai, *Common Wisdom: Peer Production of Educational
Materials*, by Yochai Benkler (The Center for Open and Sustainable
Learning at Utah State University, 2005).

</div>

<div id="ref-bookdownAllBooksBookdown" class="csl-entry">

Bookdown, "All books on bookdown.org", online:
\<<https://bookdown.org/home/archive/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-braveBrave" class="csl-entry">

Brave, "About Brave", online: \<<https://brave.com/about/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-centreforopeneducationtheuniversityofminnesotaLawTextbooks"
class="csl-entry">

Centre for Open Education, the University of Minnesota, "Law Textbooks",
online: \<<https://open.umn.edu/opentextbooks/subjects/law>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-clicklawwikibooksAllWikibookTitles" class="csl-entry">

Clicklaw Wikibooks, "All Wikibook Titles", online:
\<<https://wiki.clicklaw.bc.ca/index.php?title=Contents>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-creativecommonsLicenses" class="csl-entry">

Creative Commons, "About The Licenses", online:
\<<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-c-ski2017CanadianUniversityOpen" class="csl-entry">

C-SKI, "Canadian University Open Access Statements", (2 October 2017),
online:
\<<https://ospolicyobservatory.uvic.ca/canadian-university-open-access-statements/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-dalhousieuniversityCatalogue" class="csl-entry">

Dalhousie University, "Catalogue", online:
\<<https://digitaleditions.library.dal.ca/catalog/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-ecampusontarioWelcomeOtOpen" class="csl-entry">

eCampus Ontario, "Welcome ot the Open Library", online:
\<<https://openlibrary.ecampusontario.ca/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-googleContributingChromium" class="csl-entry">

Google, "Contributing to Chromium", online:
\<<https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src/+/master/docs/contributing.md>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-haythornthwaite2009crowds" class="csl-entry">

Haythornthwaite, Caroline, *[Crowds and communities: Light and
heavyweight models of peer
production](https://doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2009.137)* (IEEE, 2009).

</div>

<div id="ref-hughmcguire2017CanYouClone" class="csl-entry">

Hugh McGuire, "Can you 'clone' a Pressbooks book? You can now\*!", (31
August 2017), online:
\<<https://pressbooks.com/new-features/can-you-clone-a-pressbooks-book-you-can-now-2/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-iskmeOER" class="csl-entry">

ISKME, "OER", online: \<<https://www.oercommons.org/oer>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-johnson2019NationalSurveyOnline" class="csl-entry">

Johnson, Nicole, *[National Survey of Online and Digital Learning 2019
National
Report](http://www.cdlra-acrfl.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/2019_national_en.pdf)*,
by Nicole Johnson (Canadian Digital Learning Research Association,
2019).

</div>

<div id="ref-libraryinnovationlabharvardlawschoollibrary"
class="csl-entry">

Library Innovation Lab, Harvard Law School Library, "About", online:
\<<https://opencasebook.org/pages/about/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-libraryinnovationlabharvardlawschoollibrarySearch"
class="csl-entry">

Library Innovation Lab, Harvard Law School Library, "Search", online:
\<<https://opencasebook.org/search/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-microsoftMicrosoftEdge" class="csl-entry">

Microsoft, "Microsoft Edge", online:
\<<https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/edge>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-mikeneumegen2021HowGitCan" class="csl-entry">

Mike Neumegen, "How Git Can Power an Exciting Future for Content
Management", (31 August 2021), online:
\<<https://www.netlify.com/blog/2021/08/31/how-git-can-power-an-exciting-future-for-content-management/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-neylon2020EvaluatingInstitutionalOpen" class="csl-entry">

Neylon, Cameron et al, *[Evaluating institutional open access
performance: Methodology, challenges and
assessment](https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.19.998336)*, preprint, by
Cameron Neylon et al, preprint (Scientific Communication and Education,
2020).

</div>

<div id="ref-nyman2011ForkNotFork" class="csl-entry">

Nyman, Linus & Tommi Mikkonen, *[To Fork or Not to Fork: Fork
Motivations in SourceForge
Projects](https://doi.org/doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-24418-6_18)*, Scott
A. Hissam et al, eds (Salvador, Brazil: Springer, 2011).

</div>

<div id="ref-ochoa2013AnalysisExistingTechnological" class="csl-entry">

Ochoa, Xavier et al, *[Analysis of Existing Technological Platforms for
the Collaborative Production of Open
Textbooks](https://www.learntechlib.org/primary/p/112098/)* (Victoria,
BC: Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education, 2013).

</div>

<div id="ref-openeducationalbertaCatalog" class="csl-entry">

Open Education Alberta, "Catalog", online:
\<<https://openeducationalberta.ca/catalog/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-picazo-sanchez2020HMACSecurePreferences" class="csl-entry">

Picazo-Sanchez, Pablo, Gerardo Schneider & Andrei Sabelfeld, *[HMAC and
"Secure Preferences": Revisiting Chromium-Based Browsers
Security](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-65411-5_6)*, Stephan Krenn,
Haya Shulman & Serge Vaudenay, eds (Vienna: Springer International
Publishing, 2020).

</div>

<div id="ref-pressbooksPressbooksDirectory" class="csl-entry">

Pressbooks, "Pressbooks Directory", online:
\<<https://pressbooks.directory/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-riceuniversitySubjects" class="csl-entry">

Rice University, "Subjects", online: \<<https://openstax.org/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-shankland2020GoogleGetsWeb" class="csl-entry">

Shankland, Stephen, "Google gets web allies by letting outsiders help
build Chrome's foundation: Major Chromium browser allies include
Microsoft, Samsung, and Brave", (20 November 2020), online:
\<<https://www.cnet.com/tech/mobile/google-gets-web-allies-by-letting-outsiders-help-build-chromes-foundation/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-slashdotSlashdotNewsNerds" class="csl-entry">

Slashdot, "Slashdot: News for nerds, stuff that matters", online:
\<<https://slashdot.org>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-statcounter2022BrowserMarketShare" class="csl-entry">

StatCounter, "Browser Market Share Worldwide", (23 June 2022), online:
\<<https://gs.statcounter.com/browser-market-share>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-statisticscanada2021CanadianUndergraduateTuition"
class="csl-entry">

Statistics Canada, "Canadian undergraduate tuition fees by field of
study", (8 September 2021), online:
\<<https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=3710000301>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-teamvivaldi2018VivaldiCodeIntegration" class="csl-entry">

Team Vivaldi, "Vivaldi's code integration. Our developers speak.", (12
September 2018), online:
\<<https://vivaldi.com/blog/vivaldi-code-integration/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-theuniversityofsaskatchewanCatalog" class="csl-entry">

The University of Saskatchewan, "Catalog", online:
\<<https://openpress.usask.ca/catalog/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-torontometropolitanuniversityCatalog" class="csl-entry">

Toronto Metropolitan University, "Catalog", online:
\<<https://pressbooks.library.ryerson.ca/catalog/oertitles>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-unesco2019RecommendationOpenEducational" class="csl-entry">

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
*[Recommendation on Open Educational Resources (OER),
CL/4319](https://en.unesco.org/about-us/legal-affairs/recommendation-open-educational-resources-oer)*
(2019).

</div>

<div id="ref-usbureauoflabourstatisticsCollegeTuitionFees"
class="csl-entry">

US Bureau of Labour Statistics, "College tuition and fees increase 63
percent since January 2006", online:
\<<https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2016/college-tuition-and-fees-increase-63-percent-since-january-2006.htm>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-usbureauoflabourstatisticsCostCollegeTuition"
class="csl-entry">

---------, "Cost of college tuition has remained stable since September
2019", online:
\<<https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2021/cost-of-college-tuition-has-remained-stable-since-september-2019.htm>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-teamvivaldi2018BuiltUsingChromium" class="csl-entry">

Vivaldi, Team, "Built using Chromium, but different from Chrome", (28
February 2018), online:
\<<https://vivaldi.com/blog/vivaldi-different-from-chrome/>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-wikibooksShelfLaw" class="csl-entry">

Wikibooks, "Shelf:Law", online:
\<<https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Shelf:Law>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-wikipedia2022WikipediaConsensus" class="csl-entry">

Wikipedia,
"[Wikipedia:Consensus](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wikipedia:Consensus&oldid=1093505801)"
in *Wikipedia* (2022).

</div>

<div id="ref-xtoolsCanadianRefugeeProcedure" class="csl-entry">

XTools, "Canadian Refugee Procedure - Page History", online:
\<<https://xtools.wmflabs.org/articleinfo/en.wikibooks.org/Canadian_Refugee_Procedure>\>.

</div>

<div id="ref-yergler2010SearchDiscoveryOER" class="csl-entry">

Yergler, Nathan R, *[Search and Discovery : OER's Open
Loop](http://hdl.handle.net/10609/4852)* (Barcelona: Universitat Oberta
de Catalunya, Open University of the Netherlands, Brigham Young
University, 2010).

</div>

</div>

[^1]: See Rory McGreal, Terry Anderson & Conrad, Dianne, "Open
    educational resources in Canada" in Miao, Fengchun, Mishra, Sanjaya
    & McGreal, Rory, eds, *Open Educational Resources: Policy, Costs and
    Transformation* (Paris: UNESCO, 2016) 63 at 65, 86, observing that
    openness in Canadian universities is a "growing trend" that is
    "gaining ground", but still "in its early stages"; *Evaluating
    institutional open access performance: Methodology, challenges and
    assessment*, preprint, by Cameron Neylon et al, preprint (Scientific
    Communication and Education, 2020) at 1, 7 notes that while open
    access is "becoming rapidly more important", Canada and the United
    States lag behind Europe and Latin America; For a critical view on
    the open movement in higher education, see Martin Weller, *The
    battle for open* (London: Ubiquity Press, 2014).

[^2]: For example, twenty-four Canadian post-secondary institutions have
    recommended "green open access" (adding a pre-publication version of
    a manuscript to an open access repository) "as the first priority"
    and have published one or more statements about their commitment to
    open: C-SKI, "Canadian University Open Access Statements", (2
    October 2017), online:
    \<<https://ospolicyobservatory.uvic.ca/canadian-university-open-access-statements/>\>;
    a 2020 report found that 60% of Canadian universities mention
    activities related to open educational resources on their websites:
    *Environmental Scan of Open Education Service and Support in
    Canada*, by Nicole Askin et al (Canadian Association of Research
    Libraries, 2020) at 2; the 2019 *National Survey of Online and
    Digital Learning* found that over two-thirds of Canadian
    post-secondary institutions used OERs and over half used open
    textbooks, *National Survey of Online and Digital Learning 2019
    National Report*, by Nicole Johnson (Canadian Digital Learning
    Research Association, 2019) at 28--29.

[^3]: In little more than a decade from 2010, tuition costs on average
    across all fields of study in Canada rose by \$1,547, and in law
    they rose by \$4,253: Statistics Canada, "Canadian undergraduate
    tuition fees by field of study", (8 September 2021), online:
    \<<https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=3710000301>\>.

[^4]: Federal legislation and court decisions made by
    federally-constituted courts can be freely reproduced for any
    purpose under two conditions: "due diligence is exercised in
    ensuring the accuracy of the materials reproduced and the
    reproduction is not represented as an official version":
    Reproduction of Federal Law Order, SI/97-5. Copyright restrictions
    on provincial legislation and court decisions vary depending on
    jurisdiction, but at least some provinces explicitly permit
    non-commercial reproduction under certain conditions; see, for
    example: "Policy on copyright on legal materials", (25 November
    2021), online:
    \<<http://www.ontario.ca/page/copyright-information-c-queens-printer-ontario>\>,
    "Copyright/Permission to Reproduce", online:
    \<<https://www.bccourts.ca/Privacy%20Statement.html>\>, "Courts of
    Nova Scotia Copyright Policy", online:
    \<<https://courts.ns.ca/General_Content/copyright_pop_up.htm>\>. The
    Canadian Legal Information Institute ("CanLII"), which hosts
    collections of legislation and court decisions from every province
    and territory, also permits hosted documents to be copied and used
    free of charge and without authorization, provided CanLII is
    properly attributed as the source: "CanLII Website Terms of Use",
    online: \<<https://www.canlii.org/en/info/terms.html>\>.

[^5]: Matthew Bodie, "The future of the casebook: An argument for an
    open-source approach" (2007) 57 J Legal Educ 10; Edward L Rubin,
    *Legal Education in the Digital Age* (Cambridge \[UK\]: Cambridge
    University Press, 2012); W Warren H Binford, "Envisioning a
    Twenty-First Century Legal Education New Ideas in Law and Legal
    Education" (2013) 43 Wash U J L & Pol'y 157--186 at 171--75; Stephen
    Johnson, "Teaching for Tomorrow: Utilizing Technology to Implement
    the Reforms of MacCrate, Carnegie, and Best Practices" (2014) 92:1
    Nebraska Law Review 46--85; Jeremy J McCabe, "Following the Herd:
    Bringing Electronic Casebooks into the Law School" (2015) 34:3 Legal
    Reference Services Q 196--238; Joseph Scott Miller & Lydia Pallas
    Loren, "The idea of the casebook: Pedagogy, prestige, and trusty
    platforms" (2015) 11 Wash JL Tech & Arts 31; Stephen M Johnson, "The
    course source: The casebook evolved" (2016) 44 Cap UL Rev 591;
    Connie Lenz, "Affordable content in legal education" (2020) 112:3
    Law Libr J 301--325; Emma Wood & Misty Peltz-Steele, "Open your
    casebooks please: Identifying alternatives to Langdell's legacy"
    (2022) 43:1 Western New England Law Review.

[^6]: See Part II, below.

[^7]: *Common Wisdom: Peer Production of Educational Materials*, by
    Yochai Benkler (The Center for Open and Sustainable Learning at Utah
    State University, 2005) at 20--22.

[^8]: Creative Commons, "About The Licenses", online:
    \<<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/>\>.

[^9]: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, *Giving
    knowledge for free: The emergence of open educational resources*
    (Paris: Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development,
    2007).

[^10]: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
    *Recommendation on Open Educational Resources (OER), CL/4319* (2019)
    Art 6.

[^11]: The US Bureau of Labor statistics reported that from 2006-2016,
    college tuition and fees increased 63% while textbook costs
    increased 88% US Bureau of Labour Statistics, "College tuition and
    fees increase 63 percent since January 2006", online:
    \<<https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2016/college-tuition-and-fees-increase-63-percent-since-january-2006.htm>\>;
    from 2011-2021, college tuition and fees increased 32% while
    textbook costs increased 35.5% US Bureau of Labour Statistics, "Cost
    of college tuition has remained stable since September 2019",
    online:
    \<<https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2021/cost-of-college-tuition-has-remained-stable-since-september-2019.htm>\>;
    While comparable Canadian statistics are unavailable, "the cost of
    textbooks in this smaller market is often higher due to a 10-15%
    tariff imposed on imported books" Rajiv Sunil Jhangiani & Surita
    Jhangiani, "Investigating the Perceptions, Use, and Impact of Open
    Textbooks: A survey of Post-Secondary Students in British Columbia"
    (2017) 18:4 The International Review of Research in Open and
    Distributed Learning.

[^12]: Lenz, *supra* note 5; but see Nicholas B Colvard, C Edward Watson
    & Hyojin Park, "The Impact of Open Educational Resources on Various
    Student Success Metrics" (2018) 30:2 International Journal of
    Teaching and Learning in Higher Education 15, finding that the
    impact of OER on student learning goes well beyond affordable
    access.

[^13]: Benkler, *supra* note 7 at 4--5.

[^14]: Vincent Ostrom & Elinor Ostrom, "Public goods and public choices"
    in Daniel H Cole & Michael D McGinnis, eds, *Elinor Ostrom and the
    Bloomington School of Political Economy: Volume 2, Resource
    Governance* (Lanham: Lexington Books, 2015) 3.

[^15]: Kenneth J Arrow, "Economic welfare and the allocation of
    resources for invention" in Richard Nelson, ed, *The Rate and
    Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors*
    (Princeton University Press, 1962) 609; Benkler, *supra* note 7 at
    4.

[^16]: Ulf-Daniel Ehlers, "Extending the territory: From open
    educational resources to open educational practices" (2011) 15:2
    Journal of open, flexible and distance learning 1--10 at 2--3.

[^17]: Jessica Litman, *Digital copyright*, pbk. ed ed (Amherst, N.Y:
    Prometheus Books, 2006) at 15--16, 78--79; Amy Kapczynski, "The cost
    of price: Why and how to get beyond intellectual property
    internalism" (2011) 59 UCLA L Rev 970 at 974; Jeanne C Fromer,
    "Expressive Incentives in Intellectual Property" (2012) 98:8 Va L
    Rev 1745--1824 at 1750--1.

[^18]: Kapczynski, "The cost of price", *supra* note 17 at 992.

[^19]: Nathan R Yergler, *Search and Discovery : OER's Open Loop*
    (Barcelona: Universitat Oberta de Catalunya, Open University of the
    Netherlands, Brigham Young University, 2010); Talea Anderson &
    Chelsea Leachman, "Strategies for Supporting OER Adoption through
    Faculty and Instructor Use of a Federated Search Tool" (2019) 7
    Journal of Librarianship and Scholarly Communication at 3.

[^20]: The repositories we searched were: (AtlanticOER, "Catalog",
    online: \<<https://caul-cbua.pressbooks.pub/catalog/>\>), (BCCampus,
    "Find Open Textbooks", online:
    \<<https://open.bccampus.ca/browse-our-collection/find-open-textbooks/>\>),
    (Bookdown, "All books on bookdown.org", online:
    \<<https://bookdown.org/home/archive/>\>), (Clicklaw Wikibooks, "All
    Wikibook Titles", online:
    \<<https://wiki.clicklaw.bc.ca/index.php?title=Contents>\>),
    (Dalhousie University, "Catalogue", online:
    \<<https://digitaleditions.library.dal.ca/catalog/>\>), (eCampus
    Ontario, "Welcome ot the Open Library", online:
    \<<https://openlibrary.ecampusontario.ca/>\>), (Harvard Law School
    Library Library Innovation Lab, "Search", online:
    \<<https://opencasebook.org/search/>\>), (ISKME, "OER", online:
    \<<https://www.oercommons.org/oer>\>), (Rice University, "Subjects",
    online: \<<https://openstax.org/>\>), (Open Education Alberta,
    "Catalog", online: \<<https://openeducationalberta.ca/catalog/>\>),
    (Centre for Open Education, the University of Minnesota, "Law
    Textbooks", online:
    \<<https://open.umn.edu/opentextbooks/subjects/law>\>), (Pressbooks,
    "Pressbooks Directory", online:
    \<<https://pressbooks.directory/>\>), (The University of
    Saskatchewan, "Catalog", online:
    \<<https://openpress.usask.ca/catalog/>\>), (Toronto Metropolitan
    University, "Catalog", online:
    \<<https://pressbooks.library.ryerson.ca/catalog/oertitles>\>),
    (Wikibooks, "Shelf:Law", online:
    \<<https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Shelf:Law>\>).

[^21]: Updated versions of the same casebook by the same author were
    counted as one incident.

[^22]: This category includes casebooks currently in progress or left
    incomplete.

[^23]: One open casebook we located was available on both the CanLII and
    BCCampus platforms, which is reflected in the total count.

[^24]: Wikibooks contributors, for example, are only identified by
    username and therefore cannot be traced back to a law faculty

[^25]: These casebooks cannot be found through a repository search, and
    were instead located via a direct link.

[^26]: Only one author is listed, but two additional contributors are
    acknowledged.

[^27]: These casebooks cannot be found through a repository search, and
    were instead located via a direct link.

[^28]: Wikibooks contains a feature which shows the history of edits
    made to each Wikibook, including statistics about user
    contributions. See, for example, XTools, "Canadian Refugee
    Procedure - Page History", online:
    \<<https://xtools.wmflabs.org/articleinfo/en.wikibooks.org/Canadian_Refugee_Procedure>\>.
    All statistics were accessed in June 2022.

[^29]: Hugh McGuire, "Can you 'clone' a Pressbooks book? You can
    now\*!", (31 August 2017), online:
    \<<https://pressbooks.com/new-features/can-you-clone-a-pressbooks-book-you-can-now-2/>\>;
    "Pressbooks For Self Publishers", online:
    \<<https://pressbooks.com/self-publishers/>\>.

[^30]: Library Innovation Lab, Harvard Law School Library, "About",
    online: \<<https://opencasebook.org/pages/about/>\>.

[^31]: David Wiley, TJ Bliss & Mary McEwen, "Open educational resources:
    A review of the literature" in J Michael Spector et al, eds,
    *Handbook of Research on Educational Communications and Technology*
    (New York: Springer, 2014) 781 at 63.

[^32]: See Lusiella Fazzino & Julie Turley, "Remixing an Open
    Educational Resource: A Case Study of the Uncommon 'R'" (2019) 25:1
    Urban Library Journal at 5--6, for a general review of the
    literature; Henderson and Thai also find that the most popular
    module on OpenStax CMS---a platform the authors dubbed as "most
    promising" for social authorship---had only been reused and
    republished once by another author: Stephen E Henderson & Joseph
    Thai, "Crowdsourced coursebooks" (2014) 51:4 Alta L Rev 907--924 at
    914--5.

[^33]: Slashdot, "Slashdot: News for nerds, stuff that matters", online:
    \<<https://slashdot.org>\>.

[^34]: Yochai Benkler, "Coase's penguin, or, linux and" the nature of
    the firm"" (2002) Yale Law Journal at 426--7.

[^35]: Sebastian Spaeth, Christian Penzold & Sophie Toupin, "User
    Motivations in Peer Production" in Matthieu O'Neil, Toupin, Sophie &
    Pentzold, Christian, eds, *The Handbook of Peer Production*
    (Hoboken, New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2021) 1; Georg von
    Krogh et al, "Carrots and Rainbows: Motivation and Social Practice
    in Open Source Software Development" (2012) 36:2 MIS Quarterly
    649--676; Joseph Feller et al, "Motivation in Free/Open Source
    Software Development" in *Perspectives on Free and Open Source
    Software* (Cambrdige, Massachussetts: The MIT Press, 2005) 1.

[^36]: Spaeth, Penzold & Toupin, *supra* note 35; Rong Wang,
    "Motivation, governance, efficacy and contribution: A social
    practice model of commons-based peer production" (2019) 20:3
    International Journal of Networking and Virtual Organisations
    245--264; Francesco Rullani & Stefan Haefliger, "The periphery on
    stage: The intra-organizational dynamics in online communities of
    creation" (2013) 42:4 Research Policy 941--953; von Krogh et al,
    "Carrots and Rainbows", *supra* note 35.

[^37]: Shun-Ling Chen, "How Empowering Is Citizen Science? Access,
    Credits, and Governance for the Crowd" (2019) 13:2 East Asian
    Science, Technology and Society: an International Journal 215--234
    at 218; Elizabeth Crisp Crawford & Jeremy Jackson, "Philanthropy in
    the Millennial Age: Trends toward Polycentric Personalized
    Philanthropy" (2019) 23:4 Independent Review 551--568 at 557; George
    G Triantis, "Improving Contract Quality: Modularity, Technology, and
    Innovation in Contract Design" (2013) 18:2 Stanford Journal of Law,
    Business & Finance 177--214 at 205; Ilkka Tuomi, "Open Educational
    Resources and the Transformation of Education" (2013) 48:1 European
    Journal of Education 58--78 at 63.

[^38]: Benkler, *supra* note 7 at 20--22.

[^39]: *Ibid* at 10.

[^40]: Gary W Matkin, "The Opening of Higher Education" (2012) 44:3
    Change 6--13 at 9.

[^41]: Paul Duguid, "Limits of Self-Organization: Peer Production and
    'Laws of Quality'" (2006) 11:10 First Monday.

[^42]: Miller & Loren, "The idea of the casebook", *supra* note 5; Wood
    & Peltz-Steele, "Open your casebooks please", *supra* note 5.

[^43]: Lenz, *supra* note 5; Wood & Peltz-Steele, "Open your casebooks
    please", *supra* note 5.

[^44]: Mark Cummings, "Beyond affordability" (2019) 31:1 Against the
    Grain 15 at 25.

[^45]: Ismar Frango Silveira et al, "A Digital Ecosystem for the
    Collaborative Production of Open Textbooks: The LATIn Methodology"
    (2013) 12 Journal of Information Technology Education Research
    228--249 at 233.

[^46]: Xavier Ochoa et al, *Analysis of Existing Technological Platforms
    for the Collaborative Production of Open Textbooks* (Victoria, BC:
    Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education, 2013);
    Carlos Rodriguez-Solano, Salvador Sánchez-Alonso & Miguel-Angel
    Sicilia, "Creation of reusable open textbooks: Insights from the
    Connexions repository" (2015) 46:6 British Journal of Educational
    Technology 1223--1235 at 1224.

[^47]: Albert O Hirschman, *Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Responses to
    Decline in Firms, Organizations, and States* (Harvard University
    Press, 1970).

[^48]: Benkler, *supra* note 7 at 3.

[^49]: David Sandomierski, *Aspiration and Reality in Legal Education*
    (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2020) at 305.

[^50]: *Ibid* at 265: "(t)he choices professors make about what content
    to emphasize, how to frame it to students, and how to evaluate, all
    put into effect certain visions about law".

[^51]: Olga Maria Belikov & Robert Bodily, "Incentives and barriers to
    OER adoption: A qualitative analysis of faculty perceptions" (2016)
    8:3, 3 Open Praxis 235--246 at 242.

[^52]: Tomohiro Nagashima & Susan Hrach, "Motivating Factors among
    University Faculty for Adopting Open Educational Resources:
    Incentives Matter" (2021) 2021:1, 1 Journal of Interactive Media in
    Education 19 at 8.

[^53]: María del Pilar Sáenz Rodríguez, Ulises Hernandez Pino & Yoli
    Marcela Hernández, "Co-creation of OER by teachers and teacher
    educators in Colombia" in *Adoption and Impact of OER in the Global
    South, edited by Cheryl Hodgkinson-Williams and Patricia B Arinto*
    (Cape Town & Ottawa: African Minds, International Development
    Research Centre & Research on Open Educational Resources, 2017) at
    144.

[^54]: Caroline Haythornthwaite, *Crowds and communities: Light and
    heavyweight models of peer production* (IEEE, 2009).

[^55]: Hirschman, *supra* note 47.

[^56]: "Collaboration and community: The labor law group and the future
    of labor and employment casebooks" (2013) 58 Louis ULJ 61.

[^57]: As Benkler notes, the modularity and granularity problems may
    also play a role here. Where peer-produced textbooks are
    insufficiently modular or granular, this can lead to the
    centralization of the project in just a few hands or under a single
    leader. In this situation, "as the leader has written much of the
    original text, and continues to overlay his or her framework on the
    textbook as a whole, other participants can feel left out, excluded,
    or overruled" Benkler, *supra* note 7 at 21.

[^58]: Ben Goodger, "Welcome to Chromium", (2 September 2008), online:
    \<<https://blog.chromium.org/2008/09/welcome-to-chromium_02.html>\>.

[^59]: Pablo Picazo-Sanchez, Gerardo Schneider & Andrei Sabelfeld, *HMAC
    and "Secure Preferences": Revisiting Chromium-Based Browsers
    Security* (Vienna: Springer International Publishing, 2020) at 107.

[^60]: StatCounter, "Browser Market Share Worldwide", (23 June 2022),
    online: \<<https://gs.statcounter.com/browser-market-share>\>.

[^61]: Linus Nyman & Tommi Mikkonen, *To Fork or Not to Fork: Fork
    Motivations in SourceForge Projects* (Salvador, Brazil: Springer,
    2011) at 259.

[^62]: Ben Collins-Sussman, Brian W Fitzpatrick, C Michael Pilato,
    "Chapter 4: Branching and Merging" in *Version Control with
    Subversion: For Subversion 17*.

[^63]: Nyman & Mikkonen, *supra* note 61 at 259.

[^64]: Team Vivaldi, "Vivaldi's code integration. Our developers
    speak.", (12 September 2018), online:
    \<<https://vivaldi.com/blog/vivaldi-code-integration/>\>.

[^65]: Team Vivaldi, "Built using Chromium, but different from Chrome",
    (28 February 2018), online:
    \<<https://vivaldi.com/blog/vivaldi-different-from-chrome/>\>.

[^66]: Microsoft, "Microsoft Edge", online:
    \<<https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/edge>\>.

[^67]: Brave, "About Brave", online: \<<https://brave.com/about/>\>.

[^68]: Wikipedia, "Wikipedia:Consensus" in *Wikipedia* (2022).

[^69]: Google, "Contributing to Chromium", online:
    \<<https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src/+/master/docs/contributing.md>\>.

[^70]: Stephen Shankland, "Google gets web allies by letting outsiders
    help build Chrome's foundation: Major Chromium browser allies
    include Microsoft, Samsung, and Brave", (20 November 2020), online:
    \<<https://www.cnet.com/tech/mobile/google-gets-web-allies-by-letting-outsiders-help-build-chromes-foundation/>\>.

[^71]: Vivaldi, *supra* note 65.

[^72]: *Land and Property in Canada's Political Economy* (available at
    www.opensourcelaw.ca).

[^73]: The 2021-22 version of the casebook is available at
    2021.opensourcelaw.ca. The ability to create persistent annual
    versions of an open casebook is just one example of the "forking"
    model applied in this context.

[^74]: Anne Gentle, *Docs like code* (Morrisville, NC: Lulu Press,
    2017).

[^75]: Eben Moglen, "Free software and the death of copyright" (1999)
    4:8 First Monday.

[^76]: Hulya Ertas, Burak Pak & Caroline Newton, "An operational
    framework for an online community based on the commons, dissensus
    and shared knowledge" (2020) 2 Postdigital Science and Education
    397--415 at 402.

[^77]: Undeniably, there may be limits to the degree to which dissenters
    can sustain their own versions linked to the original as the number
    or complexity of the differences increases. In part, this challenge
    is related to the modularity problem discussed in Part II. To the
    extent that casebook content can be modularized and changes
    contained to discrete modules, it likely be more feasible for forks
    to sustain themselves over time.

[^78]: Mike Neumegen, "How Git Can Power an Exciting Future for Content
    Management", (31 August 2021), online:
    \<<https://www.netlify.com/blog/2021/08/31/how-git-can-power-an-exciting-future-for-content-management/>\>.
