---
acknowledgement: This report draws on research supported by the Social
  Sciences and Humanities Research Council.
affiliation: Schulich School of Law, Dalhousie University
author:
- Karen Foster
- Jamie Baxter
- Anna Giddy
authors:
- foster
- baxter
- giddy
csl: chicago.csl
date: 2022-11-01
institute:
- dal: Schulich School of Law, Dalhousie University
link-bibliography: true
link-citations: true
month: November
projects:
  - foodgov
subtitle: How Food Businesses Experience Regulation in Nova Scotia
tags:
title: Working at Odds
typeset_info: false
year: 2022
---

# Background

Strengthening community food security is an emerging policy priority
across the Atlantic region ([Andree et al.
2016](#ref-andree2016structural)). This goal depends heavily on the
development of regional economies that support local food production and
distribution. But even as demand grows for food from local farmers and
other food entrepreneurs, and the 'buy local' movement gains more
traction, regulatory governance in the food system is changing rapidly
and becoming more complex, potentially increasing compliance costs and
uncertainty for some of these businesses at scale ([Miewald, Hodgson,
and Ostry 2015](#ref-miewald2015tracing); [Laforge et al.
2018](#ref-laforge2018new)). New governance regimes may also be driving
food businesses toward greater formality in their business transactions
and structures, requiring them to navigate a host of other legal issues
ranging from employment protections to contract design. Moreover, many
food businesses---especially farms---are based in rural communities and
are therefore far removed from the geographic source of most food
governance regimes. They may also lack easy access to lawyers and other
forms of legal supports needed to help businesses identify, understand
and address their legal and regulatory problems ([Baxter and Yoon
2014](#ref-baxter2014no); [Civil Justice
2015](#ref-canadianforumonciviljustice2015RuralRemoteAccess)).

Evidence of food entrepreneurs' experiences navigating their regulatory
and other legal environments, however, remains largely anecdotal.
Accordingly, we developed a study to better understand and characterize
food entrepreneurs' experiences with law and regulation by identifying
current barriers, the consequences of those barriers, and the response
strategies of those who confront them. Through interviews with food
entrepreneurs across Nova Scotia, we find that most face enormous
challenges in their mission to maintain their own livelihoods by feeding
others. Many said that food businesses need to be highly innovative to
be profitable, but such innovation is stymied by barriers to accessing
capital and, more pertinent to our study, the 'red tape' of confusing,
contradictory, and intensifying regulation. While every business owner
we interviewed believed in the need for regulations to keep consumers
and workers safe, they could identify moments in their own business
history where they faced problems with the regulatory *system*.
Understanding how those problems are manifest---and how businesses
develop strategies to respond---is a critical first step toward
reorienting the regulatory environment around the goal of a stronger,
more resilient and more collaborative approach to supporting and growing
the regional foodshed.

# What We Did: Methods & Data

Data for this project were gathered through semi-structured interviews
conducted with food and agricultural business owner-operators in Nova
Scotia. Interview participants were recruited through the FarmWorks
Investment Cooperative Limited (FarmWorks), which administers a
Community Economic Development Investment Fund (CEDIF) supporting
responsible community investment in food production and distribution in
Nova Scotia. FarmWorks currently administers small investment loans to
approximately 70 clients across the province and works actively to
support those businesses in navigating their regulatory challenges. A
call to participate was first circulated via e-mail and social media by
Farmworks' Managing Director to each of the organization's approximately
70 active clients in November 2021, along with an invitation to share
the call with other food businesses who might want to participate. A
subsequent reminder call was circulated in January 2022.

We note that our sample universe for this study was not necessarily
representative of the broader food and agricultural sector in the
province, but mainly limited to FarmWorks clients and therefore to the
types of businesses served by that organization: smaller, newer,
owner-operated businesses working in production, processing and retail.

A total of 10 interviewees participated in individual, semi-structured
interviews conducted by a member of our research team. Each interview
lasted approximately one hour, during which we gathered qualitative data
about interviewees' regulatory and legal problems and their responses to
those problems, including supports available from public and private
sources. Interview data were transcribed, coded and analyzed
thematically. Our aim at the outset was to interview closer to thirty
people, but we suspect we ran into the research "fatigue" plaguing many
studies in the time of COVID-19 ([De Koning et al.
2021](#ref-de2021survey)), on top of a potential reluctance to air
grievances in a relatively small provincial food producer community.
Nevertheless, we heard robust, detailed stories that shed light on some
shared experiences. Our findings from this data are described in detail
below.

# What We Found: Regulators & Food Businesses Working at Odds

Proprietors of food business, including farms, restaurants, food
retailers, prepared food manufacturers, butchers and bakers, are united
in one common mission: they seek to make a living for themselves by
feeding others. Their success depends on many factors. To start a
business, they must have access to capital, expertise and training. To
sustain or grow that business, they must produce quality foods and food
products that people want to eat, they must be able to charge a price
that exceeds their input costs while remaining competitive with other
businesses, they must ensure access to their products for consumers, and
they must stay flexible to adapt to changing costs, supply conditions
and broader economic and social circumstances. They must also be able to
find and retain workers in an extremely tight labour market---a
difficultly faced in many sectors but one that is especially serious in
agriculture and food services.

Shaping and sometimes compounding these many challenges are the
regulatory regimes that are the focus of this study ([Cruz et al.
2021](#ref-cruz2021CanadaRedTape)). Those regimes are often multiple,
overlapping and complex, in the sense that they extend across
jurisdictions, government departments, instruments and modes of
governance. Food businesses in Nova Scotia can be regulated
simultaneously at federal, provincial and municipal levels of government
(and in some circumstances, by Indigenous governments and
internationally). They might confront multiple regulations at any of
those levels issued by several different government departments, or a
single regulation that invokes fragmented departmental responsibilities
([Berger Richardson and Lambek 2018](#ref-richardson2018federalism)).
Food businesses might also struggle to identify and understand regimes
sourced in a variety of regulatory instruments, from legislative
provisions and their associated regulations to an array of
administrative rules and guidelines. Any of these instruments themselves
might have been further interpreted and applied by the provincial or
federal courts or by administrative tribunals. Finally, while
regulations are conventionally understood to come from *governments*,
food systems are often *governed* through collaborative partnerships
between government bodies, non-governmental organizations and even
private firms. Food businesses increasingly need to account for and
respond to the rules, regulations and norms that emerge from these
collaborative governance arrangements as well ([Doberstein
2016](#ref-doberstein2016DesigningCollaborativeGovernance); [Ambrose,
Siddiki, and Brady 2022](#ref-ambrose2022collaborative)).

Our interview data shows that food businesses face a daunting number of
challenges when trying to meet all of these requirements. Importantly,
the financial challenges---having and making enough money---are directly
connected to the regulatory challenges, insofar as complying with
regulations can sometimes be prohibitively expensive. Thus,
disentangling the different kinds of barriers facing food entrepreneurs
in the province is difficult, whether you are a food business trying to
succeed, a researcher trying to understand, or a policymaker trying to
respond. But our study also shows that there are significant
opportunities for Nova Scotia's economic, regulatory and governance
structures to better support the province's food system by improving
supports and removing barriers to work *with* rather than *against*
businesses, and there are sensible places to start implementing these
changes in the short term.

We report our findings by starting with the different **regulatory
challenges** identified in our interviews and describe **intersecting
issues** that emerge from the data to help better understand and situate
those challenges. We then examine **response strategies** used by our
interviewees to address the regulatory challenges they face. To
conclude, we explore the broader **systemic perspectives** that emerge
in our data and reflect on specific **ideas for change**.

## Experiences with Regulation

The interviewees in this study understood that food businesses need to
be highly innovative to be profitable, citing the need to diversify
their products, find niche markets, and compete with importers and
domestic conglomerates, both of which enjoy advantages of scale,
potential regulatory evasion and preferential policies (detailed below).
But this necessary innovation is stymied by confusing, contradictory,
and intensifying regulation and by the unclear, uneven, inflexible and
sometimes arbitrary way those regulations are communicated and enforced.
Below, we report the most common manifestations of such problems and
highlight examples of each to illustrate how food businesses confront
these problems as a matter of everyday experience.

We want to underscore a key insight from our interviews: the most common
problems interviewees reported having with food system regulations were
not about the regulations *per se*. Indeed, only a few interviewees
could point to problems with the design of specific rules. Instead, they
focused on how the regulations were interpreted, explained, applied, or
enforced. For some, these problems were expressed in terms of the costs
of regulatory compliance or the unequal distribution of costs and
benefits in a particular sector or geography. For others, regulatory
problems were tied to experiences with individual inspectors or
organizations. It was evident that each interviewee intended to comply
with the regulations they confronted; it was the operationalization of
regulations, rather than the regulations themselves, that impeded
compliance. On the whole, these findings should draw our attention to
the real-life experiences of those governed by food system regulations
and the importance of their perspectives in thinking about how to do
better.

### Unrealistic, Unaffordable and Self-Serving Enforcement

Achieving complex regulatory compliance emerged as a pervasive challenge
in our study. Almost every business we interviewed had an example of a
regulatory bar that was too high (too complicated, too time-consuming or
financially unsustainable) for small businesses to reach. They
identified challenges with regulations addressing a range of issues,
from health and food safety, to building codes, to organic
certification. This inability to attain---or sustain---compliance was
not for lack of trying, and several interviewees explained the
strategies and solutions they had attempted in good faith efforts to
meet regulatory demands. Frequently, these "solutions" themselves turned
out to be too expensive or otherwise out of reach.

One farmer told us about CanadaGAP, a voluntary food safety
certification for "Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs)" in fruit and
vegetable production and processing that some retailers require. In
order to get GAP certified, this farm had to pay a third-party company
for an "electronic platform to make it much easier to track" compliance,
but the farmer has mostly Mexican and Jamaican seasonal workers who
cannot operate the electronic system for language proficiency and
literacy reasons. The farmer estimated it would cost \$20-30,000 a year
to "maintain records" for CanadaGAP compliance. These high costs---the
farmer noted---have direct implications for the diversity and therefore
resiliency of the local food system, observing that "we can\'t afford to
follow the regulations on everything and remain diversified, which
\[...\] goes against good sense \[...\] because diversification is
what\'s made us profitable the last 15 years and we\'re throwing it out
the window because of government regulation." We note that, based on the
farmer's own CanadaGAP example, this statement encompasses
non-governmental regulations as well.

A prepared food maker shared their experience with obtaining an export
license from the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA), along with
additional certifications needed from the Global Food Safety Initiative
(GFSI) in order to sell their products in local grocers. Unable to meet
these requirements on their own, the interviewee went so far as to
employ a Safe Quality Food (SQF) manager. "Sometimes I feel it's
impossible," they explained. "Why am I doing this, but it is very
strict, and it will make sure that we have fewer recalls." Despite these
efforts---or rather, because of them---the regulatory requirements were
overwhelming. Of the GFSI certification, they noted:

> There are, oh my God, I don't know, at least 500 pages of
> documentation, which we had to go through. And then like, we have to
> review everything, we have to do mock recalls, we have---it's like a
> job of one person to just take care that we are following all these
> rules, \[...\] and that person cannot do anything else. So he cannot
> be producing the products, that person has to just see we are
> following the rules. So there are too many regulations which \[...\].
> I'll just give you an example. It's extremely, very much logical but
> we will never do it if not put on a document.
>
> So, chemicals have to be put in a locker or something which is logical
> that food and chemical should not be put together. But you have to put
> a lock, and there's a documentation of six pages which we have to go
> through and we have to sign *every week* to make sure that the
> chemicals are locked \[...\]. The grass cannot be growing outside
> beyond one inch: logical. If the grass grows too much, there will be
> insects coming inside, but there is documentation on it. \[...\] GFSI
> makes sure the tiny, tiny points cannot be ignored."

Similar problems confronted a food producer who had been stalled by
provincial food safety regulations around his ingredients and
processes---specifically, around the shelf life, storage requirements,
and "best before" date of his product, and who needed lab tests to prove
compliance. He noted that one solution would be to employ a lab
technician to carry out these tests, but---perhaps obviously---this is
not affordable for a small, owner-operated business.

Another entrepreneur who runs a restaurant and inn on a farm struggled
to address regulations governing the construction of his physical space.
They were told by an inspector, "I need to double Gyproc all my walls
and put a fire-rated push steel door in the farmhouse from the dining
room into the living room and all this crazy stuff." The entrepreneur
took this as a sign that "they don't understand my business model." In
other words, they saw the inspector as approaching their businesses in
the same way as a large hotel or restaurant, without any acknowledgement
that the space only holds a dozen people---maximum---and is not much
different in that sense than a homeowner hosting a small dinner party.

Food businesses bear the brunt of these barriers to compliance, but
their collective responses to those challenges can also have significant
negative consequences for the regulatory regimes themselves. One farmer
we interviewed spoke about the decline in credibility of the regime
governing organic certification, which in their view had become bogged
down in bureaucratic process and ultimately disconnected from producers.
The farmer had given up organic certification because it required too
much paperwork and, more importantly, had become "a purely bureaucratic
exercise" where some farms seek to "look" organic on paper but may have
some unsustainable and counterproductive practices in reality. The
farmer had been on the verge of losing their certification because they
had misplaced a receipt for a fertilizer and the inspector could not
verify that it was permitted. While hunting for the receipt, the
absurdity of the situation hit this farmer and they gave up in protest.
The farmer blamed the fact that organic certification had, in recent
years, been absorbed into the federal bureaucracy. "In the old days, the
inspectors were also certified organic farmers. And so we all---I used
to sit on certification review committees and stuff, and we didn't want
our colleagues slipping up, because then we'd all lose our, our good
name, right. Wonderful way of bringing farmers together. And it was
approachable. And it was really hard to cheat \[...\]. No one cheated."
Now, "you have federal bureaucrats codifying what organic is and how you
certify for it."

Connected to these dysfunctions within regulatory systems, interviewees
voiced their skepticism that some regimes---those addressing food safety
in particular---have become self-serving. While food safety regulations
were created to solve legitimate problems, they also come at a cost,
often too steep for the businesses that most need the help. There are
business advisors who specialize in food safety, one food safety
recordkeeping platform that costs approximately \$14,000/year, food
safety consultants, and services, such as food safety manuals, offered
by Perennia Food and Agriculture Inc.---a provincial development
agency---that our interviewees told us they must pay for.

One food processor recalled approaching Perennia for help to develop a
Food Safety Plan under the Hazard Analysis Critical Control Points
(HAACP) process (the standard process used to create a food safety
plan). Perennia connected them to a private company offering software to
help navigate the HAACP process. The company "started charging" for the
software immediately, even though the processor did not yet know how to
use it and did not use it until months later. On top of that, this
interviewee reported that even getting an audit to become Global Food
Safety Initiative (GFSI) certified---a requirement to sell in local
grocery chains---costs around \$10,000. They saw the cost as worth it to
avoid recalls---which are more expensive by far---but it was
nevertheless a huge burden on a small business.

Of course, many of the entities above were named as sources of support
for our interviewees; they help when businesses hit a brick wall. At the
same time, it is not a stretch to say that there are livelihoods now
wrapped up in maintaining regulatory regimes in their current
complexity.

Finally, one person we interviewed helped us to understand the
connection between rigid or unrealistic regulations and deeper food
system problems. They gave the example of newer cooks who had been
trained using only pre-packaged meat products and had never learned how
to butcher and use an entire animal. From the interviewee's standpoint,
this contributed to a particular approach to food safety---one that
regards anything different from shrink-wrapped meats as insufficiently
"sterile", and one that has ultimately been internalized by some food
safety regulators. In this perspective, "everything is so structured,
that anything outside that structure, you know, people just can\'t
accept what they don\'t understand." For this interviewee, there was a
direct line between certain food practices like using pre-packaged meats
and an overly structured, inflexible regulatory environment.

### An Uneven Regulatory Playing Field

Many of the food entrepreneurs we interviewed believed that the
regulatory system in Nova Scotia had, intentionally or not, created an
uneven playing field that advantaged importers (i.e., producers in other
provinces and countries), bigger local producers (e.g., not
owner-operated or having a more complex management structure and higher
margins), and older, more well-established businesses.

Interviewees reflected on the role of both geography and scale in
determining who bears regulatory burdens. A farmer who sells mostly in
farm markets and independent stores believed that the producers of many
imported products, like fruits and vegetables, in conventional grocery
stores face less stringent regulations than producers located in Nova
Scotia. The intensification and increased number of regulations on food
production in the province "keeps tilting that playing field against
us," they said. "We have to compete with the outside world that doesn\'t
necessarily meet all or any of those regulations." The farmer said the
province should "either back off the regulations to the point where we
are on a level playing field with the rest of the world, or close the
borders" to less-regulated imports. While it is difficult to ascertain
whether provincial producers face a heavier regulatory burden than
foreign producers, the *perception* of inequity is important, and shapes
how local producers view and engage with domestic regulation.

Another farmer noted "there\'s so many subsidies, wage subsidies,
there\'s so many things to help industrial agriculture" and food
manufacturing, such as potato chips. The province will give "millions of
dollars in wage subsidies over 10 years, and, you know, no, no property
tax \[...\] to try to create 50 jobs." The result is that industrially
manufactured food becomes cheaper to produce to the point that "potato
chips are cheap, and carrots are expensive. And then we have a
healthcare crisis." Similarly, the farmer said, "giant meat processing
plants have such a regulatory advantage over a small one. \[...\] Small
plants inherently are probably safer. So much less batch mixing all that
stuff," and yet they had a much steeper climb to meet their regulatory
requirements.

Sometimes, these different regulations at scale create surprising and
perhaps unintended consequences. A brewer of local products shared a
problem they continue to experience with the mark-ups set by the Nova
Scotia Liquor Corporation (NSLC), which are higher for importers and
larger domestic producers and lower for small domestic producers. At one
level, this policy is good for small producers (more money from each
sale flows back to them). But at the same time, these different tariff
rates mean that the NSLC has little incentive to sell much of the local
product because *their own* return is lower. Paired with the relative
monopoly on liquor sales enjoyed by NSLC, such outcomes, the brewer
observed, seem perverse: "And yet, regulatory wise, they also say to me,
you can\'t sell anywhere \[else\] except in your own facility."

These challenges of scale also intersect with the advantages and
flexibility often afforded to entrenched interests, to the disadvantage
of start-ups and new entrants ([Clapp 2021](#ref-clapp2021problem)). One
person we interviewed said they believed "there's still like an old boys
club going on," with some businesses' practices "grandfathered in, and
they're trying to, like, make new businesses like mine \[follow the new
rules\]. You have to, like, grow with the standards." Another business
owner noted that the seafood industry in the province is controlled by
two or three large conglomerates, for whom the regulations work, but did
not get into specifics.

Linked to the theme of unclear regulations and poor communication,
interviewees spoke to frustrations with the lack of any clear
justifications for the uneven regulations they experience in Nova
Scotia. An entrepreneur in the prepared foods sector told us that he was
prohibited by the province from using fresh yogurt in their product.
"But yet, if you went to Sobeys, you could buy yogurt dressings that
were made in PEI or Germany. They just wouldn\'t allow you to do it.
\[...\] But \[...\] you can sell it in stores from some other place. So
my argument is why \[...\] can't I do it?" Such obvious disconnects in
the regulatory outcomes for producers in different
jurisdictions---without a clear explanation or justification for why
such differences exist---understandably compounds a sense of
arbitrariness and unfairness among those bearing the higher regulatory
costs.

All of these examples add up to one thing: newer, smaller, locally-owned
food businesses---including farms, food processors, restaurants and
prepared food makers---feel like they have to compete in the same market
as larger and non-local businesses that are perceived to operate under a
different, more permissive set of rules. It is an uneven playing field
and local food is, from the perspective of those working in and
supporting the local food system, at a clear disadvantage.

### Inspectors as Obstacles

Some of the most common problems interviewees identified focused on how
regulations were interpreted, communicated and applied by the inspectors
responsible for monitoring and enforcing regulatory compliance. And
while the precise experiences varied, they can all be characterized
similarly, with inspectors often becoming obstacles in the way of a
business's goals rather than people with a shared stake in creating and
sustaining a safe, robust food system and economy.

In one example, inspectors applied regulations for which the business
owner could not locate any written documentation. This led the business
owner to conclude that the issue was "not in the code" and must simply
be the inspector's "preference." Other actors in the food system---not
inspectors, but support organizations that are supposed to help guide
food businesses---engaged in similar conduct. One producer was told by a
support organization to make a change in the business and was directed
to the provincial *Meat Inspection Act*. But when the producer actually
looked at the legislation, they were unable to find any rule requiring
such a change.

In other instances, inspectors did not have the experience or knowledge
to be able to apply regulations effectively. One business said that when
they were being inspected, the inspector "was asking *me* questions. And
I was just like, how do you not know these?" Sometimes, uninformed
inspectors sent business proprietors down rabbit holes with false
information and erroneous recommendations. For example, an entrepreneur
produced sauce in a pressure-cooker and their usual practice was to let
it cool on counters before storage. A provincial food safety inspector
told them that they needed to put the sauce in the refrigerator to cool.
Given that the entrepreneur did not have a refrigerator big enough to
accommodate a normal sized batch\--and they believed their practice to
be safe---the entrepreneur consulted a food scientist who concurred that
given the processing method (a pressure cooker) and adequate pH levels,
there was no need to refrigerate the sauces.

In other instances, lack of knowledge combined with an inability on the
part of inspectors to exercise their discretion appropriately by
applying regulations in a nuanced, case-specific way. A butcher shop was
told that they needed a boot wash station behind their retail counter.
In their interview, the butcher cited this as an example of inspectors'
inability to think "objectively" about the reasonable application of
rules to the case in front of them. A boot wash station might make sense
in a larger shop with extremely high volumes, higher square footage, and
production system geared toward wholesale, but for the small, high-end
operation with just a handful of employees that produces some
ready-to-cook products and sells directly to customers, "if your boot
germs are on the counter, regardless of \[whether\] you have a boot wash
station, you have a problem."

Similarly, one prepared food producer was told by a provincial food
safety inspector to halt production and that they would need to put a
"may be hazardous to your health" sticker on all their products. After
much back-and-forth and lab testing, it was determined that in fact only
a "best before" date was needed. It is not difficult to see the
dramatically different impacts that these two responses would have on
the producer's business.

We also heard examples in which the application of regulations by
inspectors seemed far out of line with accepted business practices and
disproportionate to the economic consequences. Farmers, by one account,
are "hassled" by inspectors about their packaging. "We sell a lot of
eggs at market," one interviewee told us, "we used to recycle all the
egg cartons and the food inspector came in and said, 'No, it has to all
be in new cartons.'" The interviewee felt this was "kind of ridiculous.
There\'s no plausible food safety need for that. And using new cartons,
costs our egg producers, probably something like 25% of their net profit
on the whole business. This is un-ecological and just stupid." They
noted that other farmers were told not to use banana boxes for food
delivery and sales.

At times, business owners could not figure out a reason for inspectors'
actions beyond the inspector being unfair or wanting to prove a point.
One business had to be inspected for fuel safety, and the province
recently hired a new inspector for his region. "He came around to both
our facilities which have been operating under previously inspected,
complete, safe, zero incidents, conditions for nine years. And he made
us a big giant list of all sorts of deficiencies, forced us to change
them, even painting the threads on a galvanized gas pipeline that has
been on the side of my building for nine years, we\'re out with paint
brushes in November, you know, to touch up threads that he thought might
one day rust through." Other businesses with similar experiences felt
that inspectors were "grandstanding" or "justifying their existence."
Interviewees were frustrated by these kinds of experiences, and
described inspectors as "small-minded bureaucrats", "box checkers like
you wouldn't believe," and "power hungry"; they were perceived as having
a "hero complex".

At a systems-level, business owners cited several events that
illustrated a gap between the regulatory system and the kinds of
livelihoods it is meant to support and enhance. For example, a new
software training was scheduled for all the staff of one regulatory
department in agriculture during the busiest time of the growing season,
so farmers could not get in touch. In another case, the Department of
Environment proposed to change the start time of abattoirs to 8:00am to
accommodate the normal schedule of inspectors, who did not want to begin
their days any earlier---delaying the abattoirs for hours past their
normal schedules. It appeared that those responsible for applying the
regulatory regime simply did not understand the day-to-day experiences
of those they were attempting to regulate. Notably, this latter example
is one in which the regime proved responsive to businesses' concerns and
the scheduling changes were eventually reversed.

Several interviewees suggested an underlying reason behind some of these
experiences with inspectors: the path to becoming an inspector is now
less likely to begin with individuals having any farm or business
experience. As a result, these inspectors do not understand enough about
food production or processing to be able to use common sense about
regulations or to help businesses problem-solve in a more collaborative
mode. The inexperience of some inspectors has even become something of a
joke in some circles. "They joke about it all the time. Like, oh, yeah,
the health inspector showed up with like, brand new white sneakers."

Whatever the full range of reasons for the perceived behaviour of the
inspectors detailed above, we have little doubt about the consequences.
Inspectors and other representatives of the regulatory regime in these
anecdotes do not appear to work *with* food businesses to co-create a
safe, reliable, robust food system. Instead, inspectors and food
businesses appear to work against each other. As one interviewee
observed, "good" regulatory enforcement is not just about following the
rules (or ensuring that others do so): "You know, it\'s like they, they
follow the rules, sometimes by the book. And that\'s not what people
really need. You know, like, sometimes people just need a little bit of
extra support." There may well be excellent relationships between some
businesses and some inspectors, but we did not find much evidence of
that in our interviews. Whether this is mere perception or grounded in
objective fact, the result is the same: a lack of trust and cooperation
creates the conditions for severe dysfunction within the regulatory
system.

### Poor Communication and Coordination

Almost as common as unhelpful inspectors were examples of poor
communication from and between different regulatory entities, and of
instances where it seemed, to businesses, that the 'right hand' does not
know what the 'left hand' is doing. While many of the parties mentioned
below were also viewed positively at times, they were also implicated in
some of the interviewees' more frustrating experiences.

We heard, for instance, about confusion and uncertainty around the
authority and appropriate role of different regulatory actors. One food
business that is inspected by the Department of Environment told us that
the Department frequently does not know how to apply the relevant
regulations and requests that the business ask Perennia for advice.
Perennia, in turn, asks what the Department of Environment wants.
"Perennia is contracted out by the government to help advise on safety
stuff," the business's owner explained. "But \[it's\] not actually a
governing body \[...\] so I just got tossed back and forth a lot between
these two people \[Perennia and Department of Environment\] that didn\'t
really want to deal with me." This person waited six months for a
decision on one operational matter.

Another business got conflicting recommendations from the Canada Food
Inspection Agency (CFIA) and the Nova Scotia Department of Environment,
which handles food safety. For example, these two agencies have
different rules about community kitchens being used to prepare food for
sale---in effect, the CFIA allows it while the Province does not. The
business---the sauce producer mentioned above---was told by provincial
inspectors that their product could not be cooled on the countertop and
needed to be refrigerated immediately, while CFIA said all that mattered
was the pH level. Similar conflicts or uncertainties can arise between
government regulations and voluntary industry certifications. For
example, businesses who export food might---at least, practically
speaking\--need to meet both CFIA requirements and those required to
certify through GFSI.

In addition to these problems with coordination and conflicting or
compounding regulations, interviewees also said that regulations and
regulatory changes are poorly communicated. For the last ten years, one
farmer we interviewed had been hearing that their farm would eventually
need to make a major investment in a new storage facility to comply with
recent changes introduced through the *Safe Food for Canadians Act*. The
farmer had not taken any action yet, as their "hand is not being
forced", but they know the change might be coming. They are considering
retiring instead of making the investment. "You always want to make the
regulation changes predictable to the business community. And that
\[has\] not been the case with the *Safe Food for Canadians Act*.
Everyone\'s like, do you know what\'s going on? And other farmers are
like, I don\'t know what\'s going on."

Other problems of communication occurred at an interpersonal level. In
one-on-one communications, some businesses felt that inspectors made
food producers feel intimidated by using specialist language and
'throwing the book at' them rather than helping them parse the
regulations and figure out how to meet them. Inspectors were often
unclear, and some business owners in the sample said they were made to
feel inferior and/or irresponsible for practices that did not conform to
regulations. These problems of communication were sometimes compounded
by slow response times that prolonged uncertainties and anxieties for
those trying to comply.

### Summary of Findings

Given the range of problems facing food businesses and the significant
consequences for continuing to operate some regulatory regimes in their
current form, our data point to a pressing need for change. At the same
time, we gained insight into the real barriers preventing that
change---some of which appear baked into the operation of the regimes
themselves.

Before turning to the ideas for change that emerged from our interviews,
we discuss a set of intersection issues that emerged in the data. These
issues were not themselves about regulations, but our interviewees drew
attention to each as an important part of the context bearing on their
experiences with different aspects of regulatory systems.

## Intersecting Issues

All of our interviewees spoke at length at their experiences with
regulations and regulatory compliance, but they also identified several
intersecting issues that shape those experiences and present compounding
barriers to participating in a stronger regional food system. We
describe four prominent themes: capital, infrastructure, labour, and
export-biased growth.

### Capital

The businesses we interviewed all currently face, have faced in the
past, or anticipate facing in the future, challenges accessing the
capital they need to start, maintain or make changes to their business.
In plain, they need money, they struggle with cashflow especially in the
beginning, and the existing offerings from government are inadequate.
There were three overarching problems identified with government funding
for agriculture and food businesses: too many grants required applicants
to raise 'matching funds' (so they need to *find* \$10,000 to get
\$10,000 more); too many were earmarked for very specific uses; and many
were too large for a small business.

As one prepared food maker told us,

> \[G\]overnment \[does\] not give enough funding. The fundings are
> there for big businesses, like let\'s say, established businesses,
> let\'s say, CGI, the big technology company, they\'re coming over
> here, Amazon is coming over here, they\'ll probably give land free to
> them. Which makes sense, but \[as\] a business who wants to grow, I
> don\'t see any support from the Nova Scotia government. I think if I
> go to the West and establish like a 10,000 square feet space in the
> kitchen, I would get more support. That\'s what I hear from my friends
> in the West, there is more fundings and more support by the
> governments over there rather than over here in the Nova Scotia.

Another said they need access to funds that do not require "matching
funds":

> That\'s not realistic, that\'s not realistic for small business owner,
> you know, we\'re taxed to death \[...\] in every way possible. And for
> us to come up with a large sum of money to actually get anything done.
> It\'s just not realistic, we can stretch it out and pay smaller
> amounts over a longer period, you know, that\'s realistic. But if you
> say, okay, well, I\'m gonna lend you 100,000, but you got to come up
> with 100,000 too for something that\'s gonna cost 200,000 most
> starting companies and even companies that have been around for \[a
> while\], they don\'t have that cash flow. They don\'t have the cash
> flow without depleting their whole company.

One interviewee said of the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency (ACOA),
"they give you money only in millions of dollars, but I don\'t want
millions of dollars. I need \$40,000." Food entrepreneurs with access to
private capital enjoy the advantage in this situation; just as those
with parents in a similar industry benefit from their inherited
knowledge and networks, those who have money or can borrow it easily
have less difficulty starting up their business and keeping it going
through the first crucial years. The only body that fills the gap, with
small amounts of funding, for general use, that do not require matching
funds, is FarmWorks, but in numerous cases, Farmworks could not offer
enough funding.

Finally, one of the farmers we interviewed said that they had *not*
experienced significant challenges gaining access to capital---but
explained quite powerfully how this was the result of "every possible
advantage starting in farming" along with layers of privilege,
generosity, and some luck. This farmer emphasized that theirs "is not a
path that would be easy to follow \[for\] your average person." While
they worked hard in "doing our best to, you know, use what we have for
the greater good", this experience helps to highlight the systematic
barriers and disadvantages faced by most in accessing the capital needed
to participate in building a resilient local food system.

### Infrastructure

Alongside funding gaps, interviewees noted serious challenges from a
lack of critical infrastructure needed to operate or grow their business
successfully. Two gaps in particular stand out: the province's lack of
abattoirs and its lack of available commercial kitchen space that can
meet CFIA or GFSI standards. Multiple interviewees raised each of these
issues, but we note just two examples.

On abattoirs, one interviewee said:

> \[T\]here\'s no place to take \[pigs\] to get processed. Oh, for me
> when I was selling my pigs to restaurants in Halifax, I would need
> almost two months' notice\--which is insane\--to be able to deliver a
> pig to a restaurant, because I need to \[...\] breed the pig, I raise
> it, I feed it, take it to the abattoir to get processed \[which
> requires booking\]. I come back a couple days later pick up the pig
> and then I deliver it to the restaurant. At the end of that process
> I\'m probably in the hole, I'm probably not making a cent because of
> all the travel, all the time, and all the money that goes into to
> raising the animal. And that\'s just one example.

Nova Scotia's lack of abattoirs---whether brick and mortar facilities or
mobile units capable of operating on farm---may be due to restrictive
and costly regulations that make it difficult for small-scale businesses
to compete ([Levangie 2021](#ref-levangie2021TakingStockAbattoir)). Lack
of access to abattoirs has been a longstanding problem for meat
producers in the province (Nicoletti, 2021). Our interviews confirmed
that this remains a pressing concern.

On commercial kitchens, one interviewee said this was their biggest
challenge in starting a business. "\[M\]y first challenges now when I
look back, I\'m like, those challenges are nothing... but my biggest
challenge, was like finding a good kitchen \[...\] a commercial
provincial kitchen."

Along with these major infrastructure challenges, interviewees noted
other gaps as well. One example is a lack of processing and packaging
facilities. We were told that some of these facilities existed in the
past---for example a cannery for preserving local fruits and
vegetables---but have since ceased operations. Like much of the seafood
in the province, they explained, this has resulted in a situation where
many fruits and vegetables grown in Nova Scotia are shipped away to be
canned, only to be shipped back for sale in local stores.

### Labour

We also heard about food businesses' many struggles to find and retain
workers. While this is a challenge for many sectors of the economy---due
to demographic shifts and economic restructuring---Canadian data shows
that farms and food businesses (in accommodations and food services) are
among the most affected by widespread labour shortages ([Statistics
Canada
2022a](#ref-statisticscanada2022BusinessOrganizationExpectations),
[2022b](#ref-statisticscanada2022BusinessOrganizationObstacles)). And
not only is the problem acute in the food sector, but it is also
especially so for smaller businesses. While larger operations, many of
which have been slowly automating some of their work processes for
years, are able to pivot and rely more on technology to fill the gap,
smaller businesses generally do not have this option.

Immigration---including regulations around hiring foreign workers---was
a key theme here. Farms and food processors have long relied on
temporary foreign workers, who work hard and have the necessary skills,
but are precarious. This reliance has persisted through the pandemic,
when immigration has posed additional challenges ([Statistics Canada
2020](#ref-statisticscanada2020TemporaryForeignWorkers)). In our
interviews, we also heard of new demands for foreign workers as local
labour was in increasingly short supply. But these demands were also
paired with a degree of uncertainty about how to navigate the regulatory
environment around immigration. As one interviewee told us:

> "\[It\] would help a lot is to \[...\] pick somebody\'s brain on the
> Human Resources side about immigrant workers, those kinds of things,
> because we certainly are going to need more of that labor in the
> summer. And it\'s \[...\] very difficult to find local people that
> want to work like that. I\'ve always heard it as a problem. And I
> remember when I was in BC, running an orchard part time, it was very
> difficult to find people to work \[...\], but it\'s the same thing
> here. I would like to know what my options are for hiring, you know,
> out of country labor, I guess. So that would be certainly something we
> need to explore here based on where we are in the business.

In other instances, food business owners turned to family
members---either temporarily or over the long term---to help them fill
labour gaps. For example, one prepared foods producer explained how
their mother helps with a range of tasks, from chopping vegetables to
packaging products. Another interviewee---a fruit farmer---related a
story about recruiting a crowd of sixty friends and family in their rush
to plant five acres of their farm during the fall season.

As some of the examples above have shown, small businesses that could
really use more hands to make more product also have to consider hiring
someone to do the work of ensuring the business adheres to regulations.
But even if they could afford to hire all the hands they need, the
current labour market may be unable to supply them.

### Export-Biased Growth

A final intersecting issue implicating the regulatory environment is a
heavy bias in government and among their partners toward export-led
growth for food businesses. As one prepared food maker told us, "ACOA
does not even look at you unless you start exporting beyond North
America." Another said "our government is so driven to export, yes,
everything we do is export." A restauranteur and farmer said, of dealing
with the Province:

> \[T\]he first question I always got was, what am I looking to export?
> Am I ready to export, everything was about exporting, and I\'m like,
> I\'m not interested in export! I want to do stuff \[that is\]
> sustainable for local, I don\'t want to export. As soon as they heard
> that I wasn\'t interested in exporting or my ability wasn't there for
> exporting, I was basically cut off, you know.

While interviewees agreed exporting *can* be "great", a sole focus on
that objective undermines food sovereignty and efforts to grow a robust
local food system capable of feeding Nova Scotians if it had to. For
many, the COVID-19 pandemic made the fragility of a globalized food
system---and the inherent risks associated with import and export
dependence, including the implications of different regulatory
requirements across jurisdictions---a very real concern and one that
needs to be taken into account when evaluating the design and
implementation of food regulations ([Clapp and Moseley
2020](#ref-clapp2020food)).

## Response Strategies

Much of our interview data addressed the many regulatory challenges and
intersecting issues confronting food businesses in Nova Scotia. We also
asked about participants' responses to those challenges to gain a
clearer picture of where people turn for help and to identify gaps in
the necessary services and supports.

Overwhelmingly, those we spoke to addressed complex, unachievable,
confusing, daunting, and/or poorly communicated regulations through some
form of self-help, and often with a remarkable degree of determination
and creativity. These strategies frequently involved digging into the
details of complex regulations and trying to interpret and apply
unfamiliar requirements without the benefit of legal expertise or
specific business experience. They also required a lot of dedication and
perseverance:

> And a lot of it I just studied the regulations and everything to death
> \[...\] I can fight back like, I'm the type of person who doesn't take
> 'no' from an inspector \[...\] when I know I'm right. So I've just
> worked with them and do a lot of education that I shouldn't have to do
> and just take it up to the next level.

At the same time, this interviewee highlighted the challenges that come
along with self-help strategies in domains that require highly
specialized knowledge and expertise:

> \[W\]e should have, like, for example, there\'s not really any channel
> of appeal of the decision of the food inspector. You know, and that is
> a very, and I\'m sure if you speak to other people, they will say the
> same thing, it\'s very hard when you try to figure out by yourself,
> how do you appeal a decision? So if you\'re a new person, you\'re new
> in the industry, never worked in the industry, trying to do something
> and you get a no. When you legally can do it based on the
> regulation---how do you appeal that? And most people just don\'t go
> the road. And even me, like it\'s exhausting. Like, it\'s 20-25 hours
> of just emailing that person that send you to that person that send
> you to that other person.

Much of the time and work of self-help also involved locating the
appropriate resources and "studying up", often without the benefit of
even high-level guidance or mentorship. One interviewee lamented, \"just
yesterday I was thinking, I don\'t have a mentor. But what I do is I
read a lot of books, and I listen to a lot of podcasts so they are my
mentors." Self-help strategies also entailed significant risks. We heard
that, when confronting delays in responses from the Department of
Environment, some simply push ahead with plans and "beg forgiveness\"
later.

Strikingly, anyone who was able to figure things out on their own
through various degrees of self-help lamented the plight of businesses
who lacked the either social capital, the education, or both to do the
same. This is a serious problem about how the risks and other costs of
regulation are distributed, particularly if Nova Scotia wants to develop
and support a diverse and inclusive entrepreneurial class.

Beyond purely self-help strategies we found that, in the absence of
access to expert advisors, food businesses sought out general mentorship
and guidance wherever they could. Farmworks loomed large here and stood
out in the interviews as an unequivocally good, reasonable, flexible,
helpful source of guidance and support. While Farmworks was a
significant lender for many interviewees, they were also much more. As a
primary source of mentorship and advice, Farmworks is the place that
many turn to for advice---both because of the organization's deep roots
and wide range of knowledge about the food system, but also because of
an absence of other feasible options. Crucially, Farmworks operates not
only as a resource to help their clients navigate regulatory problems,
but also as a key entry point into a network of mentors and advisors,
many of them informal or *ad hoc*, but nevertheless invaluable for
business operators attempting to navigate regulatory systems on their
own. One participant recalled how they often call Farmworks' Managing
Director "\[a\]nd she kind of \[...\] points me in the right direction
and helps me connect with others that might be able to help me." As one
participant put it quite simply, "\[i\]f it wasn\'t for Farmworks, I say
this all time, what would people eat?"

Other organizations in the province, like Perennia, also play important
supporting roles in helping food businesses to respond to regulatory
problems. At the same time, as one interviewee noted, the high demand
for assistance means that these organizations are themselves
overburdened: "They\'re too slow in responding back. And I think there
are too many local producers, too many local producers that they are
managing all by themselves. There\'s like one person who\'s trying to
handle everything."

Overall, we noticed---with a few exceptions---a lack of reliance on
lawyers, business professionals or other advisers in navigating
regulations. Empirical research on dealing with legal needs in Canada
and elsewhere suggests that people have a range of reasons for not
turning to more formal advice services, including but not limited to
cost. Other reasons could include uncertainty in identifying a problem
as "legal" or otherwise, an inability to locate an advisor who is both
close by and has sufficient expertise in certain subject matters, a
preference for alternative advice options, and a general mistrust of the
legal system ([Sandefur 2015](#ref-sandefur2015we)).

This vignette from our interviews nicely captures some of these
complexities:

> \[M\]y daughter works for a nonprofit. And he was doing her financials
> and accounting, and we looked at this guy and said wow he knows what
> he's doing. He's experienced right, he's 58-60 years old and has been
> doing this for 40 years, literally. And he's got some big clients.
> He's a little expensive, but I'll tell you, it's worth it because he
> gives you the advice you need. You don't do this because that's small
> town and that's not going to do anything for you, try this. And so
> that's one guy we always draw from, \[...\] is fabulous. So he's
> probably our go to. Legally, on the solicitor's side, I haven't found
> anybody here that I would be comfortable with that understands. Maybe
> \[...\] in \[...\] would be probably one of the few that would
> understand where the seed business is. But there's some retired people
> like \[...\] who was a big judge, I think he was a judge for many
> years in \[...\], a local guy who's a customer also a friend who also
> plays a little bit of an advisory role for us, so you know, he
> understands the legalities in a business like this. And so we can draw
> on those kinds of people too. But honestly, you've got to do it
> yourself. You can't rely on people to provide when disclaimers all
> those kinds of things, legal issues, liability issues, those are
> things we figured out on our own.

Finally, given the many barriers to gaining help and support from the
right people (at the right time and at reasonable cost), one interviewee
addressed the use of technology as an "alternative" source of support
for regulatory compliance. This farmer had turned to a digital platform
developed to assist with Canada GAP compliance but found that it was no
panacea to overcome the need for a certain level of technical expertise
and training.

## Ways Forward

### Perspectives on a Better Food System

The interviews tell us one big thing about the regulation of food in
Nova Scotia: it is one piece among many that works against the
establishment of a robust, vibrant, secure, sovereign and sustainable
food system in the province. While there are 'buy local' campaigns and
symbolic gestures toward local producers, there is little evidence that
any part of the Nova Scotia government, let alone food safety regulators
and inspectors, thinks about local food systematically. All of the
people we spoke to believe that the best way to feed people, create good
jobs, protect the environment, improve population health, and reduce
economic uncertainty, is to create and maintain a *local food system
based in local ownership**. ***They believe, in line with research that
shows this to be true ([Shuman 2012](#ref-shuman2012local)), that local
owners of small local food businesses will be more accountable to Nova
Scotians and will put the preservation of a safe, robust food system
ahead of their other goals---such as profit or export growth. As one
producer reflected,

> "\[E\]xporting is great. But also, now that COVID is here, like, what
> are we going to eat? We\'re gonna start seeing it with food shortages
> and stuff. Like Loblaws and Sobeys and Superstore are businesses,
> they\'re not charities, when they have the bulk of their population in
> \[Central Canada\], they\'re not going to send food out here if they
> don't have to. If they're going to get the same amount of money
> centrally, why would they ship it? \[If that happens,\] what are we
> going to eat? Like, we might go back to all meat and turnips, you
> know, the way it used to be, right? \[\...\] when Graves was down
> there canning, or \[*inaudible*\] was making pies, they were
> reasonable, because it\'s a factory, you know, but you have like one
> little cafe over here making 10 jars of pickles... it's not cheap, and
> it's just going to further divide the haves and the have nots."

The producer's point is that small businesses are trying to fill a gap
in local food---canned, preserved foods, for example---but they are
doing it in such a niche, craft way that they are not affordable for
most consumers. This interviewee pointed back to a time when Nova Scotia
had mid-sized factories that could produce canned vegetables at
reasonable prices, comparable to imports. The loss of this capacity in
the province was once viewed as progress ([Agriculture and Agri-Food
Canada
1969](#ref-agricultureandagri-foodcanada1969CanadianAgricultureSeventies)),
but it does not look like that anymore.

For those who have been able to sustain viable local food businesses, a
critical challenge is to capture enough of the value from production in
order to remain profitable. Our interviewee who produces bottled sauces
told us that, "\[a\] lot of times the margins are so little they\'re
intense. Like let me tell you, I sell a bottle for \$4 and \[...\] I
sell to distributor for \$4.50 the distributor sells it for \$5.50 and
then it goes at the store for \$7.99 So I\'m getting only half the price
so now I and the cost of the product for me \$4 I make only 50 cents. So
those are a lot of challenges."

One farmer connected the dots between food safety and a weak,
import-dependent system. Ironically, they said, our efforts to make food
safer have created so many hurdles for local producers that they could
not compete with imports that are produced under less strict safety
regulations. Governments had not looked at "the big picture," and as a
result, the local food system was weaker and food had become less safe.
They explained:

> "The majority of the foodborne illness that we do get comes from
> outside our own country. So what\'s the government\'s answer to that?
> Oh, let\'s regulate our farmers more. So we\'ll get safer food. Well,
> the unfortunate thing is, it makes food less safe for Canadians
> because it puts us in a disadvantage, it means we sell less because
> there\'s more being brought across the border. So farms shrink, and
> farms go out of business and so there\'s less local food available
> both to Canadians, less safe local food and more imported, less safe
> foods. The end result \[...\] is that food is less safe for
> Canadians".

We are unable to corroborate the relative safety of domestic versus
imported food, but it is a question worth answering. This farmer
believed the increased pressure is having a dire impact on farmers'
mental health. "You know, agriculture people say, 'oh, it\'s the
lifestyle.' Well, I\'m afraid this lifestyle is not improving, like the
stress levels are through the roof. You know, I would guess that at
least half of farmers are on anti-anxiety and antidepressants. I am." It
is a short step to link these mental health outcomes with the pressures
that come along with farmers' and other food entrepreneurs' commitments
to the local food system: "But you boy, you\'ve got to be on it all the
time. Don\'t take days off. Anyway, that\'s my final point is you\'re in
or you\'re not." Such commitments inevitably carry heavy personal costs.

Nearly every person we spoke to felt that, while Nova Scotia consumers
supported them and tried to seek out and choose local products, the
system they were operating within made this increasingly difficult. Some
noted that at the institutional level, there is very little support for
local. One interviewee, who had "spoken to politicians about this",
said:

> "If the provincial government, which funds some \[...\] institutions,
> including jails, community colleges, hospitals, seniors' homes, if
> they would designate that 10% of the food budget would go towards
> local, then you would have a very healthy local food producing
> environment in Nova Scotia. Just 10% of the food budget, if it had to
> be local, if it had to be say fresh lettuce from Nova Scotia, or
> chicken, rather than getting frozen chicken from Texas, if they could
> have just 10% of the budget, which would be huge, it would \[...\] be
> really supportive of Nova Scotia food producers \[...\] Other places
> do it, Quebec does it with their cheese, they do it with all kinds of
> stuff. \[...\] I\'ve had politicians tell me that free trade
> regulations block them from doing it. And that\'s a bunch of
> \[nonsense\]. Because if you designated that you get a certain
> percentage of the chicken that you buy has to be within three days of
> old or four days old. They can\'t do that from Texas, you can only do
> that from a local market. So it can be done. But if they did that,
> generally speaking, if politicians got behind that you would have a
> locally produced food environment that would be very healthy and
> people would be actively involved in it and making money in it in Nova
> Scotia as opposed to having to import everything."

Another pointed out that the province's food system is operating at a
fraction of its potential capacity due to productive land being
fallowed. "We could certainly produce I think we\'re under producing,
probably by about 90%. That\'s how bad it is." They believed the
province needs to "get that land in production." Several interviewees
noted the absurdity of having high rates of food insecurity in the
province's agricultural backbone---the Annapolis Valley---where farming
is so difficult to break into, land is ironically scarce because owners
are sitting on it, paying little to no taxes, and farm labour so
short---all seemingly fixable problems, with the political will to do
it, and with a government that thinks about food as a *system.*

This is a key problem with regulations: from inspectors all the way up
through the organizations that employ them to the governments that set
the regulations they enforce, there is no sense that they are there to
create and sustain and protect a *local food system* rooted in small,
owner-operated, sustainable, ethical, environmentally-conscious farms
and food production businesses. Nobody we spoke to wants *no*
regulations. As one farmer said, "every rule regulation in and of
itself, or at least almost everyone is good, right? Nobody argues that.
but together they\'re onerous." And the people who produce food in Nova
Scotia feel that the regulatory system works *against,* rather than
*for,* local food. One of the most basic insights to be gained from
speaking to those working in this system is that such consequences are
*not* inevitable. If those responsible for making, interpreting and
applying the rules saw more clearly their role in strengthening the
regional food system, the whole practice of regulation might start to
look less like an adversarial process and more like a shared enterprise.

On a positive note, there is great potential in our local food system.
The fact that local farmers contend with "greenwashing" and
"local-washing" in other businesses---imports that try to emulate the
local esthetic---shows that there is a strong market for local food;
consumers *want* local and sustainable. The businesses in this study
have their minds on sustainability, innovation, and the future, and each
of them could point to numerous other businesses with the same raison
d'etre.

They are also adapting with changes in climate, demographics and global
markets, and have an understanding of where things are going. As one
interviewee noted, "We have the ability to, to grow things here almost
all year round. I mean, our, our zoning is changing all the time, and
it\'s getting warmer, but, you know, with, with the amount of
greenhouses and all that sort of stuff, we probably won\'t have to
import very much at all."

Moreover, food producers understand their role in more than market
terms. They see food as a central pillar in health and equity. What they
want is a signal, backed by action and investment, that governments
understand that local food and food security are health issues too. One
reflected on the many \"stresses" on our healthcare system. "Part of
that stress is an ever increasingly obese public. And this whole
question of sugar, and what it does to us, in terms of our metabolisms,
and our reliance on caloric intake, is now come into play because this
stress is too great on public health care." As this interviewee and
several others noted, processed food, most of it imported, is one of the
main culprits in increasing the public's intake of sugar ([Hawkes
2010](#ref-hawkes2010InfluenceTradeLiberalization); [Moubarac et al.
2017](#ref-moubarac2017consumption)). They see their own products as a
solution, if only they could compete with cheap, readily available,
mass-produced imports.

### Ideas for Change

When asked, our interviewees offered up no shortage of ideas for
changing the regulatory system to better serve local food businesses. At
a high level, our interviewees emphasized that solutions needed to
address the fundamental problem that regulations are too often siloed,
narrowly focused, and disconnected from one another. Something as simple
as restrictions on constructing "alternative" waste systems (like an
incinerator toilet) on farms can have wide-ranging effects for land and
business development, housing and accommodations, and the environment.
Those who design, interpret and apply regulatory regimes need to find
proactive ways to ensure that they do not simply try to bracket the
complexity and interconnectedness of the food system they are tasked
with governing.

In that vein, one interviewee identified the need for provincial and
municipal governments to develop legislative frameworks that shift
fundamental aspects of the relationships between food businesses and
their regulatory environments. This person gave the example of the
*Maine Food Sovereignty Act*, which delegates a range of powers over
food laws governing direct consumer-to-producer transactions to local
governments. This allows local communities a greater degree of control
over how regulations addressing issues like food safety apply to small,
owner-operated businesses:

> Something I would love to see, which has happened in Maine, is like
> food sovereignty bylaws in municipalities. So there\'s like a few
> places in Maine, where to sell food from your farm gate, you\'re
> allowed to do whatever you want, right. And that would go along with
> owner-built code exemptions. So like, if we could milk a cow and sell
> raw milk cheese with no quota and no health regulations from our
> doorstep. Or make homemade salami, or that kind of stuff---that would
> just make an explosion in artisan food, tourism and just all sorts of
> good things. And arguably, would be just as safe and wholesome as any
> industrial \[system\].

Having passed the *Maine Food Sovereignty Act* in 2017, the State has
recently gone even further, enacting an amendment to the State
constitution that enshrines the right of individuals "to grow, raise,
harvest, produce and consume the food of their own choosing for their
own nourishment, sustenance, bodily health and well-being."

Other ideas for change also spoke to the need to put more control back
into the hands of owner-operators. With respect to building codes:

> I would love to see an owner-built exemption to building codes. That
> would be huge. I think if Nova Scotia did that, we would become
> leaders in small scale, local agriculture in the country. It would be
> a land rush here, even beyond what there is now of interesting funky
> people who want to build affordable houses and not be hamstrung by at
> least not, you know, certain aspects of the building code, like
> composting toilets and needing power in order to get a resident
> permit, an occupancy permit, things like that.

Another system-level idea for change addressed inequities in access to
land as a basic factor of local production. One person identified the
unequal distribution of land ownership in Nova Scotia and the lack of
government policies to encourage redistribution as one promising area
for action:

> There\'s this whole stranglehold on land here that people have, and
> they refuse to let go of it. But they refuse to do anything on it, and
> it\'s productive land, right? That is something I think the government
> has to look at if they haven\'t already. I\'ve never heard any
> resources or read anything about it. But I would think at some point,
> they have to start taxing their property. I mean, it\'s ridiculous. I
> can own thousands and thousands of productive agricultural acres and
> pay zero dollars of tax. Where, tell me in what country, what province
> in what world in the universe does that exist. Nova Scotia, it is the
> only place in Canada. So there\'s something that the government could
> certainly do, and it would sure help other producers, because then
> there would be more land available to rent to lease or to purchase.

Suggestions for more dedicated attempts to harmonize conflicting or
confusing regulations also spoke directly to the need for better
coordination through a systems lens. For example, as one prepared food
producer asked, why are there multiple, overlapping food safety
certification regimes that appear to operate at different levels of
strictness or rigor? While freely admitting to not understanding all the
potential barriers to such harmonization\--"I don't know their
challenges"---the question they posed was by no means a naïve one. The
important point is not that those operating in the food system have easy
answers to complex regulatory problems, but that understanding those
problems and crafting viable solutions must start by taking seriously
their perspectives.

### Next Steps

Our goal in this study was not to set out comprehensive next steps for
addressing the problems and challenges identified in our interviews, but
our interviewees made clear that they believe there is much low-hanging
fruit here. In other words, with greater attention to the challenges
outlined above, governments, supporting organizations and others can
take significant and concrete steps to work more closely and more
collaboratively with food businesses and enable them to participate more
fully in the regional food system. Good regulation and regulatory
enforcement are necessary and welcomed by food businesses across the
province, who see themselves as active partners in strengthening the
food system and making it more resilient over time.

# About the Authors {#about-the-authors .unnumbered}

**Dr. Karen Foster:** Dr. Foster is an Associate Professor in the
Department of Sociology and Social Anthropology at Dalhousie University
and Canada Research Chair in Sustainable Rural Futures for Atlantic
Canada.

**Dr. Jamie Baxter:** Dr. Baxter is an Associate Professor at the
Schulich School of Law, Dalhousie University.

**Anna Giddy:** Anna is a third-year law student at the Schulich School
of Law.

We would like to thank Linda Best, Founding Director and Co-Chair of
FarmWorks Investment Co-operative Limited for her support in recruiting
participants for this project.

This report draws on research supported by the Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council.

# References {#references .unnumbered}

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div
id="ref-agricultureandagri-foodcanada1969CanadianAgricultureSeventies"
class="csl-entry">

Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. 1969. "Canadian Agriculture in the
Seventies: Report of the Federal Task Force on Agriculture." Ottawa:
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada.

</div>

<div id="ref-ambrose2022collaborative" class="csl-entry">

Ambrose, Graham, Saba Siddiki, and Ute Brady. 2022. "Collaborative
Governance Design in Local Food Systems in the United States." *Policy
Design and Practice* 5 (3). Taylor & Francis: 362--83.

</div>

<div id="ref-andree2016structural" class="csl-entry">

Andree, Peter, Lynn Langille, Chantal Clement, Patricia Williams, and
Emily Norgang. 2016. "Structural Constraints and Enablers to Community
Food Security in Nova Scotia, Canada." *Journal of Hunger &
Environmental Nutrition* 11 (4). Taylor & Francis: 456--90.

</div>

<div id="ref-baxter2014no" class="csl-entry">

Baxter, Jamie, and Albert Yoon. 2014. "No Lawyer for a Hundred
Miles-Mapping the New Geography of Access of Justice in Canada."
*Osgoode Hall LJ* 52. HeinOnline: 9.

</div>

<div id="ref-richardson2018federalism" class="csl-entry">

Berger Richardson, Sarah, and Nadia Lambek. 2018. "Federalism and
Fragmentation: Addressing the Possibilities of a Food Policy for
Canada." *Canadian Food Studies/La Revue Canadienne Des Études Sur
l'alimentation* 5 (3): 28--48.

</div>

<div id="ref-canadianforumonciviljustice2015RuralRemoteAccess"
class="csl-entry">

Civil Justice, Canadian Forum on. 2015. "Rural & Remote Access to
Justice: A Literature Review." Toronto: Canadian Forum on Civil Justice.

</div>

<div id="ref-clapp2021problem" class="csl-entry">

Clapp, Jennifer. 2021. "The Problem with Growing Corporate Concentration
and Power in the Global Food System." *Nature Food* 2 (6). Nature
Publishing Group: 404--8.

</div>

<div id="ref-clapp2020food" class="csl-entry">

Clapp, Jennifer, and William G Moseley. 2020. "This Food Crisis Is
Different: COVID-19 and the Fragility of the Neoliberal Food Security
Order." *The Journal of Peasant Studies* 47 (7). Taylor & Francis:
1393--1417.

</div>

<div id="ref-cruz2021CanadaRedTape" class="csl-entry">

Cruz, Marvin, Keyli Kosiorek, Laura Jones, and Taylor Matchett. 2021.
"Canada's Red Tape Report: The Cost of Regulation to Small Businesses,
Sixth Edition." Canadian Federation of Independent Businesses.

</div>

<div id="ref-de2021survey" class="csl-entry">

De Koning, Rosaline, Abdullah Egiz, Jay Kotecha, Ana Catinca Ciuculete,
Setthasorn Zhi Yang Ooi, Nourou Dine Adeniran Bankole, Joshua Erhabor,
et al. 2021. "Survey Fatigue During the COVID-19 Pandemic: An Analysis
of Neurosurgery Survey Response Rates." *Frontiers in Surgery* 8.
Frontiers Media SA: 690680.

</div>

<div id="ref-doberstein2016DesigningCollaborativeGovernance"
class="csl-entry">

Doberstein, Carey. 2016. "Designing Collaborative Governance
Decision-Making in Search of a 'Collaborative Advantage'." *Public
Management Review* 18 (6): 819--41.
doi:[10.1080/14719037.2015.1045019](https://doi.org/10.1080/14719037.2015.1045019).

</div>

<div id="ref-hawkes2010InfluenceTradeLiberalization" class="csl-entry">

Hawkes, Corinna. 2010. "The Influence of Trade Liberalization and Global
Dietary Change: The Case of Vegetable Oils, Meat and Highly Processed
Foods." In *Trade, Food, Diet and Health: Perspectives and Policy
Options*, edited by Corinna Hawkes, Chantal Blouin, Spencer Henson, Nick
Drager, and Laurette Dubé, 35--59. Oxford: John Wiley & Sons.

</div>

<div id="ref-laforge2018new" class="csl-entry">

Laforge, Julia, Ayla Fenton, Virginie Lavalée-Picard, and Stéphane
McLachlan. 2018. "New Farmers and Food Policies in Canada." *Canadian
Food Studies/La Revue Canadienne Des Études Sur l'alimentation* 5 (3):
128--52.

</div>

<div id="ref-levangie2021TakingStockAbattoir" class="csl-entry">

Levangie, Janice. 2021. "Taking Stock of Abattoir Regulations: How
Provincial Rules Help or Hinder Regional Meat Production." National
Farmers Union.

</div>

<div id="ref-miewald2015tracing" class="csl-entry">

Miewald, Christiana, Sally Hodgson, and Aleck Ostry. 2015. "Tracing the
Unintended Consequences of Food Safety Regulations for Community Food
Security and Sustainability: Small-Scale Meat Processing in British
Columbia." *Local Environment* 20 (2). Taylor & Francis: 237--55.

</div>

<div id="ref-moubarac2017consumption" class="csl-entry">

Moubarac, Jean-Claude, M Batal, ML Louzada, E Martinez Steele, and CA
Monteiro. 2017. "Consumption of Ultra-Processed Foods Predicts Diet
Quality in Canada." *Appetite* 108. Elsevier: 512--20.

</div>

<div id="ref-sandefur2015we" class="csl-entry">

Sandefur, Rebecca L. 2015. "What We Know and Need to Know about the
Legal Needs of the Public." *SCL Rev.* 67. HeinOnline: 443.

</div>

<div id="ref-shuman2012local" class="csl-entry">

Shuman, Michael. 2012. *Local Dollars, Local Sense: How to Shift Your
Money from Wall Street to Main Street and Achieve Real Prosperity*.
Chelsea Green Publishing.

</div>

<div id="ref-statisticscanada2020TemporaryForeignWorkers"
class="csl-entry">

Statistics Canada. 2020. "Temporary Foreign Workers in the Agriculture
and Agri-Food Sectors, by Industry." Government of Canada.
doi:[10.25318/3210021801-ENG](https://doi.org/10.25318/3210021801-ENG).

</div>

<div id="ref-statisticscanada2022BusinessOrganizationExpectations"
class="csl-entry">

---------. 2022a. "Business or Organization Expectations over the Next
Three Months, Second Quarter of 2022." Government of Canada.
doi:[10.25318/3310050301-ENG](https://doi.org/10.25318/3310050301-ENG).

</div>

<div id="ref-statisticscanada2022BusinessOrganizationObstacles"
class="csl-entry">

---------. 2022b. "Business or Organization Obstacles over the Next
Three Months, Second Quarter of 2022." Government of Canada.
doi:[10.25318/3310050401-ENG](https://doi.org/10.25318/3310050401-ENG).

</div>

</div>
