---

title: "Building Collaboration: Governance in Halifax's Regional Food System"

# Authors
# If you created a profile for a user (e.g. the default `admin` user), write the username (folder name) here
# and it will be replaced with their full name and linked to their profile.
authors: 
  - giddy
  - klein
  - baxter

date: '2022-10-27'
# doi: 

# Schedule page publish date (NOT publication's date).
publishDate: 

# Publication type.
# Legend: 0 = Uncategorized; 1 = Conference paper; 2 = Journal article;
# 3 = Preprint / Working Paper; 4 = Report; 5 = Book; 6 = Book section;
# 7 = Thesis; 8 = Patent
publication_types: ['4']

# Publication name and optional abbreviated publication name.
publication: 
publication_short: 

abstract: "This report provides background to the context of collaborative food systems governance in the Halifax region and offers recommendations on building an effective governance structure for ongoing oversight and implementation of the JustFOOD Action Plan."

# Summary. An optional shortened abstract.
summary: Report containing background and recommendations for a governance structure to implement the JustFOOD Action Plan in the Halifax Regional Municipality. 

tags: []

# Display this page in the Featured widget?
featured: true

# Custom links (uncomment lines below)
# links:
# - name: Custom Link
#   url: http://example.org

url_pdf: 'https://justfoodhalifax.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/justfoodgov_report_Oct2022-3.pdf'
url_code: ''
url_dataset: ''
url_poster: ''
url_project: ''
url_slides: ''
url_source: ''
url_video: ''

# Featured image
# To use, add an image named `featured.jpg/png` to your page's folder.
image:
  caption: ''
  focal_point: ''
  preview_only: false

projects:
  - justfoodgov

slides: ''

---

# Executive Summary {#executive-summary .unnumbered}

In 2019, the Halifax Regional Municipality (HRM) and the Halifax Food
Policy Alliance (HFPA) committed to co-creating the *JustFOOD Action
Plan*. The *Action Plan* will be the first regional food strategy for
the HRM, one focused on strengthening the regional food system and
enhancing community food security. JustFOOD is organized around six
concepts that originate from the *Milan Urban Food Policy Pact*:
governance; social and economic equity; food production; food supply,
processing, and distribution; health, wellness, and resilience; and food
waste ([JustFOOD 2022](#ref-justfood2022SettingTableLocal)). One outcome
contemplated by the *Action Plan* is the creation of a governance body
to oversee the realization of these principles and to provide a forum
for collaborative engagement around governance of the regional food
system.

In Spring 2022, our research group was asked by the HFPA to study and
offer recommendations on the appropriate structure for a JustFOOD
governance body. We were asked to provide a reasonably fine-grained
analysis of potential organizational structures and constitutive rules
and policies to guide decision making under the *Action Plan*. To that
end, we undertook an initial rapid literature scan to identify a set of
key criteria that define "good" governance structures in the food
systems context. Seven key criteria emerged from that review, which we
then brought to members of the HFPA Steering Committee for consultation
about our research framework.

Using these seven criteria as a starting point, we then pursued a
two-pronged approach. First, we conducted a further review of academic
research on local-regional food systems governance to establish what
lessons we could identify to help guide development of a governance
structure for the *Action Plan*. Second, we gathered publicly-available
data on food policy council structures from around the country in the
form of constitutive documents such as terms of reference and
organizational bylaws. Using our seven key criteria, we coded these data
to extract and synthesize grounded recommendations for structuring a
governance body in Halifax. These recommendations range over issues from
the size of the body, to the composition of its membership, to its
relationship with external stakeholders.

Finally, to contextualize the findings from both our literature review
and the primary data, we reviewed relevant legislative frameworks in
Nova Scotia and federally. This final step helped us to identify
specific legal powers or barriers that might influence the appropriate
form of governance in HRM along a continuum of "internal" to "external"
structures.

This report presents the findings from our research, organized around
the seven-criteria framework we established at the outset and refined
over the course of our work.

# Context: Collaborative Food Systems Governance

The research described in this report is situated in the context of
"collaborative food systems governance" (sometimes called "networked" or
"polycentric" governance). We take as given that a governance structure
for JustFOOD will need to account for this context. As such, the concept
of collaborative governance is central to understanding the framework we
use in the research and for interpreting our results.

As with other complex socio-ecological systems, effective food systems
governance requires a coordinated response across system actors,
decision-making process and policies from production to consumption. To
date, Canadian governments' responses to food system
problems--especially at the federal and provincial levels--have been
highly fragmented ([Berger Richardson and Lambek
2018](#ref-richardson2018federalism)). Increasingly, municipal
governments are being called on to address the resulting gaps and to
take on a more prominent role in food systems governance ([MacRae and
Donahue 2013](#ref-macrae2013municipal); [Baxter and Rose
2019](#ref-baxter2019CitiesTimeUncertainty)). Larger urban governments
in particular have become a focal point for action ([Mah and Thang
2013](#ref-mah2013cultivating)). Launched in 2014 and now signed by 199
cities internationally, the *Milan Urban Food Policy Pact* advocates for
cities to take on new positions of leadership in supporting healthy and
sustainable food systems, even as it urges "coherence between municipal
food-related policies and programmes and relevant subnational, national,
regional and international policies and processes" (["Milan Urban Food
Policy Pact" 2015](#ref-2015MilanUrbanFood), Art 3).

Nevertheless, local governments both large and small face persistent
barriers in addressing food system challenges, including limited legal
jurisdiction over food issues, narrow geographic reach, declining
financial resources, and limited expertise. To overcome these barriers,
local governments are beginning to turn to new institutional structures
for collaborative governance. These emerging forms of governance cut
across conventional jurisdictions, organizational lines,
public-private-civic spheres, and other boundaries to create and deliver
public goods by pursuing collective decision-making through
decentralized networks of governmental and non-governmental actors
([Emerson, Nabatchi, and Balogh
2012](#ref-emerson2012IntegrativeFrameworkCollaborative)).

An extensive research literature on collaborative governance across
several different policy domains has developed over the past decade, but
concrete insights about how to design and implement decision-making
structures conducive to collaborative governance are only beginning to
emerge. Common challenges include navigating complex political
environments across multiple levels of government, building a broad
network of relationships, successfully establishing a diverse group and
learning how to work effectively with all members, having access to
consistent and adequate resources, balancing program and policy work,
defining a sufficiently narrow policy focus, dependence on specific
individuals or organizations resulting in lack of adaptive resilience,
and adequate frameworks for assessing overall impact. The research and
recommendations in this report are aimed at designing a governance
structure for HRM's regional food system that is directly responsive to
such challenges.

## Internal vs External Structures

Before turning to the details of institutional design discussed in the
main section of this report, we identify a crucial first step in
determining the appropriate governance structure for JustFOOD: whether
the formal entity responsible for governance be created *internal* to
the Halifax Regional Municipality, *external* to the municipality, or as
some type of *internal-external* hybrid. This choice will have important
consequences for each of the seven implementation criteria discussed
throughout the report.

At the local level, an internal governance model is one in which the
decision-making body is embedded in municipal government and has its
mandate determined within the scope of the municipality's empowering
legislation. An external model is one in which this body is formally
created outside the legal mechanisms of municipal government, such as in
the case of a non-profit or other non-governmental organization (though
such bodies frequently have representation from one or more municipal
government actors) ([Borron 2003, 5](#ref-borron2003food)). A hybrid
model mixes features of both approaches.

This decision of internal versus external structure relates directly to
the context of collaborative food systems governance. Any body
constituted to govern implementation and future development of the
JustFOOD plan will be both a *participant* in the broader institutional
landscape of food governance--working with other actors to build a
better food system--and a *forum* for collaboration between actors who
hold membership and decision-making power within the body itself.

Each category at this level--internal, external or hybrid--offers its
own advantages and challenges, and which model works best will certainly
depend on the goals and capacities of those who are participating, as
well as the legal and political environment in HRM. When analyzing the
literature and empirical data below, we tried to pay close attention to
these categories and to use them to interpret findings and make
recommendations throughout the report. Here, we provide an analysis of
some initial considerations around the broad choice between models.

### Internal to Local Government

An internal governance structure for JustFOOD could be established as a
committee of the HRM Regional Council (the "Council") under the *Halifax
Regional Municipality Charter* (the "*Charter*")--provincial legislation
that establishes the purposes, functions and powers of the HRM. Formal
committees are established by Council and fall into one of three
categories: standing, special or advisory committees (*Halifax Regional
Municipality Charter*, SNS 2008, ch 39, ss 21(1), 3(aw)). Council has
relatively broad authority to establish one of these committees, by
policy, and confer powers and duties upon them, except the power to
expend funds \[*Halifax Charter*, s 20(1)(c)). The *Charter* also
contains a prohibition on remuneration of regional councillors appointed
to committees, though non-council members may receive a yearly
honorarium (both can have their expenses related to service reimbursed)
(*Halifax Charter*,, s 21(6)).

To implement an internal model of governance for JustFOOD, Council would
likely need to establish an advisory committee, board or commission
("advisory committee"). *Standing committees* are longstanding
committees of Council that consists exclusively of regional Councillors,
while *Special committees* are constituted to consider and report on
specific issues and are dissolved automatically once they have fulfilled
their reporting function ([Halifax Regional Municipality
2022](#ref-AdministrativeOrderOne), s 116). Because of either limits on
membership or their temporary nature, neither standing nor special
committee structures would be appropriate in this context.

An advisory committee reviews programs and policies and provides advice
on issues related to its mandate. These committees may consist of a mix
of regional Councillors and citizen volunteers appointed by Council.
They provide recommendations and advice, either directly to Council or
to a standing committee ([HRM
2022](#ref-hrm2022BoardsCommitteesCommissions)). The HRM has a *Public
Appointment Policy*, which specifies how non-council members are to be
appointed to committees ([Halifax Regional Municipality
2018](#ref-PublicAppointmentPolicy)). This policy covers all aspects of
appointment, from advertising vacant positions to outlining member
requirements and term lengths. However, Council may adapt this policy to
suit the specific needs of a committee (s 1.7). For example, the Women's
Advisory Committee specifies that the committee will be comprised of
nine women from African Nova Scotian and Black communities,
Indigenous/Aboriginal communities, LGBTQ2S+ communities, immigrant
communities, women with disabilities, Francophone/Acadian communities
and racialized communities (*Administrative Order* 2019-004-GOV, s 14).
The HRM has also imposed addition constraints on the operation of
advisory committees. Most meetings are required to be open to the
public, and committees may hear and consider submissions and
presentations from the public ([Halifax Regional Municipality
2022](#ref-AdministrativeOrderOne), ss 127, 131).

Advisory committees can be especially effective in motivating citizen
engagement and may be able to influence decision-makers and supply local
knowledge about important issues. However, there is limited scope within
the *Charter* to give such committees formal decision-making power.
Resource limitations may also play a role. At best, effective advisory
committees are able to influence Council or committee decisions through
recommendations, advocacy and education, but Councillors are under no
legal obligation to follow such advice. Advisory committees are also
themselves vulnerable to influence and changing political circumstances.
Council can elect to dissolve an advisory committee if it feels that the
has fulfilled its mandate or if Council had previous established a term
limit.

### External to Local Government

A governance entity external to the HRM could be constituted as some
form of non-profit organization ("NPO"). An NPO in Nova Scotia is formed
to pursue some public purpose and can be either unincorporated,
incorporated or charitable. An unincorporated NPO is informal, has no
board members and is focused on a specific and short term goal. As such
it is unlikely that an unincorporated entity would be able to supply the
kind of formal, durable governance structured needed for JustFOOD. An
incorporated NPO, by comparison, could be constituted under either
federal legislation (the *Not-For-Profit Corporations Act*) or
provincial legislation (the *Societies Act*).

Benefits of incorporation include protection of the society's name,
power to establish their own by-laws, perpetual existence, limits on the
risk to individual members and officers, enhanced reputation of the
organization for grant and funding purposes, and preservation of
important information such as the organization's objectives and by-laws
([Registry of Joint Stock Companies 2019,
1](#ref-SocietyIncorporationOverview2019)).

Though an incorporated NPO is approved by government and governed by
legislation, they have the ability to create their own by-laws, choose
members as they see fit (including from within and outside government)
and are formally free to be critical of governmental policies and
decision-makers. However, NPOs may struggle to access appropriate and
consistent funding, though the acquisition of charitable status--an
option for some NPOs pursuing particular purposes--can help to access
additional resources. NPOs may also lack close connections to government
decision-makers and other powerful actors, such as municipal
representatives or public administrators, thus weakening their overall
impact and effectiveness. NPOs that apply to register as a charity under
the federal *Income Tax Act* receive tax exemptions and can issue
receipts for donations and may be more trusted by the public. However,
there are strict requirements for registration and it may be difficult
for a food systems governance body to qualify as having a charitable
purpose under the rules currently in place.

### Hybrid or Arms-Length Models

A third category of governance model is one created as a type of hybrid
between internal and external structures. These entities have some
formal ties to municipal government but generally operate at
arms-length--meaning that they are connected through, for example,
resource funding arrangements and decision-making rules, but not subject
to the sole oversight or control of Council or one of its committees
([HRM 2022](#ref-hrm2022BoardsCommitteesCommissions)). These entities
typically exist either as a formal partnership established by agreement
between Council and one or more external organizations, sometimes
empowered or further delineated by special legislation.

One example of a hybrid-type model is the Halifax Regional Library
Board, a corporation established by agreement between the provincial
Minister of Communities, Culture, Tourism and Heritage and the HRM under
the provisions of the *Nova Scotia Libraries Act*. In this case, the
legislation grants the Board special powers--like the capacity to own
property or borrow funds--that are generally unavailable to municipal
advisory committees while sustaining a close relationship between two
levels of government. The *Act* also stipulates composition of the
Board's members, delineates its various powers and establishes a
separate committee for the purpose of funding review.

A second example of a hybrid governance entity operating locally is the
Community Monitoring Committee (CMC) established by agreement between
the HRM and the incorporated non-profit Halifax Waste/Resource Society
formed to monitor operations of the Otter Lake Waste and Processing and
Disposal Facility. The CMC agreement establishes a governing framework
for the committee, including its mandate, procedures, membership
composition, roles and responsibilities, and other terms of reference.
This hybrid entity is an arms-length organization made up of fifteen
members appointed by both the HRM and the Halifax Waste/Resource
Society. The membership composition and selection process of hybrid
entities varies, but most appear to have greater flexibility in their
operations and structure compared to a purely internal model.

Hybrid structures tend to consist of a wide range of stakeholders. They
can take many forms and provide flexibility geared to the specific needs
of a governing body. A food systems governance entity of this nature
would enjoy a degree of independence and autonomy, while benefiting from
local knowledge, public engagement, and broader range of funding and
administrative resources and tools. A significant challenge with this
model is that these entities may be cumbersome to create--because they
require complex negotiations among stakeholders and/or require
legislative support, which at a minimum requires provincial engagement.
HRM may also face additional legal liabilities or budgetary implications
under such a hybrid arrangement that could create resistance to its
adoption ([ArtsHalifax Advisory Committee 2017,
8--9](#ref-ArtsHalifax2017Report)).

## A Note on Definitions in this Report

We use the term "Food Policy Council" ("FPC") to describe most existing
food governance arrangements across Canada, but when referring to the
prospective entity under JustFOOD we use the more generic term
"governance structure" or "governance entity". While "FPC" is the most
commonly used term to describe these structures, we wish to avoid
prejudging the specific form that decision-making might take in HRM's
context.

# Building a Governance Structure: Lessons for JustFOOD

Our analysis and recommendations are guided by seven governance criteria
for effectively addressing primary challenges faced by food systems
governance bodies in the collaborative context. While other criteria or
framings are certainly possible, we think the ones used in this report
do a good job of addressing key challenges for food governance
identified in the research literature and work to effectively connect
these with the core objectives of JustFOOD.

Each of the criteria are described in their own subsection, below. By
way of a general overview, the seven criteria are:

1.  **Representing Sectoral Interests:** because effective collaborative
    governance relies on the dynamics of cooperation and negotiation
    more so than coercion and control, it is important that a full range
    of interests across the regional food system be represented within
    and supported by its governance body ([La Forge 2017,
    13](#ref-la2017joined); [Harper et al. 2009,
    24](#ref-harper2009food); [Calancie et al. 2018,
    34](#ref-calancie2018evaluating); [Borron 2003,
    4](#ref-borron2003food)).

2.  **Supporting Diversity, Inclusion and Accessibility:** in order for
    decision-making about the food system to be legitimate, equitable
    and fair, it must enable active participation by---and be
    accountable to---communities and community members with a range of
    connections to place, lived experiences, and ways of knowing
    ([Coplen and Cuneo 2015, 105](#ref-coplen2015dissolved); [Harper et
    al. 2009, 7](#ref-harper2009food)).

3.  **Responding to Inequities in Power:** because asymmetrical power
    relations will inevitably exist between members (and therefore
    between their communities or constituencies), governance structures
    must be able to account for these differentials, curtail them when
    possible, and encourage equitable sharing of power in
    decision-making in ways that go beyond formal equality of
    representation ([Calancie et al. 2018,
    260](#ref-calancie2018evaluating); [Bassarab et al. 2019,
    40](#ref-bassarab2019finding); [Andrée et al. 2020,
    105](#ref-andree2020CivilSocietySocial); [Schiff 2007,
    320](#ref-schiff2007food); [Borron 2003, 4](#ref-borron2003food)).

4.  **Building External Relationships:** while the governance body may
    itself be a site for collaborative governance, the ability to forge
    strong relationships with non-member actors (both governmental and
    non-government) is imperative for tackling complex food systems
    issues ([MacRae 2011, 440--41, 443,
    450](#ref-macrae2011JoinedUpFoodPolicy); [Andrée et al. 2020,
    14--15, 32--33](#ref-andree2020CivilSocietySocial); [Schiff 2007,
    140](#ref-schiff2007food)).

5.  **Promoting Public Participation and Transparency:** to ensure
    accountability and legitimacy, any governance entity's processes
    must be transparent to the public and offer appropriate channels for
    public input and participation such that the entity's obligations to
    the public good can be broadly monitored and enforced ([La Forge
    2017, 71](#ref-la2017joined); [MacRae 2011, 443,
    450](#ref-macrae2011JoinedUpFoodPolicy); [Andrée et al. 2020,
    126](#ref-andree2020CivilSocietySocial)).

6.  **Fostering Opportunities for Adequate Resourcing:** the entity must
    have the needed legal capacities and expertise to access and
    coordinate sufficient financial and human resources to fulfill its
    objectives and to ensure its long-term viability ([Bassarab et al.
    2019, 36](#ref-bassarab2019finding); [Borron 2003,
    8](#ref-borron2003food); [Schiff 2007, 140](#ref-schiff2007food);
    [Harper et al. 2009, 5](#ref-harper2009food); [Andrée et al. 2020,
    32](#ref-andree2020CivilSocietySocial)).

7.  **Embedding Adaptive Capacity:** given the rapidly changing
    physical, social and policy dimensions of food systems, embedding
    tools that promote review and flexibility enable responsiveness and
    allow the entity to change over time ([Harper et al. 2009,
    7](#ref-harper2009food)).

Our main findings are organized using these seven criteria. In each
section below, we identify **key lessons** from the research literature
that situate *why* the particular criterion is important for effective
food systems governance and then go on to provide **recommendations for
implementation** that describe *how* these lessons might be integrated
in practice.

## Representing Sectoral Interests

Food systems connect a multitude of relationships and activities across
multiple sectors, governments, organizations, and firms ([Schiff 2007,
16](#ref-schiff2007food)). Traditional approaches to problem-solving
around food-related issues have been both centralized within government
and fragmented across multiple departments and agencies ([Schiff 2007,
16](#ref-schiff2007food)). For example, nutrition issues might be
addressed in a health department and food access by non-profits or by
transportation planners ([Borron 2003, 4](#ref-borron2003food)).
Alternatively, a collaborative approach recognizes that no one
department or actor can adequately address food issues and takes
advantage of decentralized and localized process to foster relationships
across sectors.

Harnessing the perspectives of a diverse range of actors across the
regional food system leads to more creative and localized collaborative
problem-solving and avoids a narrow focus on one or a few issues
([Borron 2003, 4](#ref-borron2003food)). This approach challenges the
legitimacy of unilateral decision-making by governments and emphasizes
forums where consumers, producers and others participate in the process
alongside municipal governments ([Franzen-Castle et al. 2021,
33](#ref-franzen2021engaging)). While this approach may open more
opportunities for shared decision-making at the food systems level,
challenges can also emerge in bringing together the wide range of
backgrounds and expertise that must be included to promote effective and
long-term collaboration.

### Key Lessons From Research

1.  Governance should be designed to account for the fact that members'
    diverse interests will--at least in part--direct their policy
    priorities.

2.  Selection of members should be transparent and the process should be
    easy for the public to understand.

3.  Sectoral expertise among members supports evidence-based decisions.

Diverse membership helps FPCs navigate and connect to the broader
environment of collaborative governance ([Schiff 2007,
317](#ref-schiff2007food)). Members often include representatives
working directly in the food system (e.g. producers, processors,
distributors, retailers, consumers and waste managers) as well as those
who focus on advocacy and program and policy development such as
non-profits, community organizations, academic institutions and members
of government ([Borron 2003, 4](#ref-borron2003food); [Harper et al.
2009, 19](#ref-harper2009food); [Yeatman 1994,
23](#ref-yeatman1994food)). Strong decision-making skills and expertise
from all relevant sectors is ideal ([Schiff 2007, 321,
326](#ref-schiff2007food)). Methods for selecting sectoral members range
from self-selection, to application or election ([Harper et al. 2009,
27](#ref-harper2009food)). The method chosen to select members has an
impact on representation, diversity and power dynamics---we discuss
advantages and disadvantages of these different methods under subsequent
criteria below. Whichever method is chosen, transparency in the
selection process is important for predictability and to build trust
internally and externally.

The optimal number of members depends on the goals and criteria set by
the FPC. A fixed number of members can restrict diversity ([Schiff 2007,
257](#ref-schiff2007food)), but it is important to consider the ability
of the FPC to get the job done and effectively make decisions ([La Forge
2017, 56](#ref-la2017joined)).

Roles and responsibilities of members should be clearly defined, with a
focus on networking, knowledge, facilitation of activities, education,
and providing resources ([Schiff 2007, 326](#ref-schiff2007food)).
Establishing roles and responsibilities is important for promoting
member accountability through consistent leadership ([La Forge 2017,
56](#ref-la2017joined)). When recruiting members, roles,
responsibilities, and opportunities should be clearly established in the
membership description and should be re-iterated with assurance that
members understand them in the early days ([Borron 2003,
5](#ref-borron2003food)).

Membership composition and relationship to government can have a greater
impact on policy priorities than organizational structure itself
([Bassarab et al. 2019, 37](#ref-bassarab2019finding)). Healthy food
access, education, and food production are generally top priorities
regardless of composition ([Di Giulio 2017, 59](#ref-digiulio2017food)),
with education being slightly higher for grassroots initiatives and
non-profits ([Di Giulio 2017, 88](#ref-digiulio2017food)). Research has
found that different governance forms have a tendency to frame food
policy issues in different ways--for example, internal FPCs are more
likely to prioritize food security, while external bodies tend to focus
on food justice concepts ([Di Giulio 2017, 88,
91](#ref-digiulio2017food)). Because members from a given sector are
more likely to prioritize the issues that impact them directly, a range
of representation helps to reinforce a food systems perspective in
decision-making ([Bassarab et al. 2019, 37](#ref-bassarab2019finding)),
but this also requires attention to the dynamics of negotiation and
compromise needed to reach decisions.

### Recommendations for Implementation

#### Membership Composition

In our data, the method for allocating seats on an FPC and for selecting
members ranged from rules that attempt to "balance" sectoral
representation to those requiring a specific allocation of seats from
delegated sectors. Internal FPCs appear to set more rigid requirements
for composition by allocating a specific number of seats---or a
range---to each sector. External FPCs often appear more vague in their
requirements; they tend not to allocate seats to specific sectors,
though sectors are named. For example, the Hamilton Food Advisory
Committee, an internal FPC, specifies a range for how many members they
would like from each sector, such as "\[c\]onsumption: 2-3 members
(e.g., representation from community and neighbourhood based food
programs and cultural groups, including food literacy educators,
consumers, chefs, food enthusiasts, etc.)". The Greater Sudbury Food
Policy Council, an external FPC, states simply that members should have
experience in at least one of a number of areas relevant to the regional
food system.

Some FPCs require members to be from specific organizations or hold
certain positions with their organization. The Winnipeg Food Council
requires that:

> "...membership shall not exceed 12 Members (11 voting members and one
> non-voting member), and will include the following: i. The Mayor of
> Winnipeg or designate; ii. One City Councillor (can also serve as the
> Mayor's designate); iii. One representative nominated by the Province
> of Manitoba (non-voting); iv. One member from health sector
> (dietitian, community health worker, public health professional)
> nominated by the Winnipeg Regional Health Authority; v. Two members
> involved with food production (efforts should be made to represent a
> diversity of producers; e.g. rural, urban, small scale, large-scale);
> vi. One member from food businesses (retailers, farmers' markets, food
> entrepreneurs, wholesalers, etc.); vii. One member from research
> sector (Universities, research alliances, etc.); viii. One member from
> community groups or networks connected to food issues (e.g. food
> access, food skills, resource networks, etc.); and ix. Up to three
> citizen members at large with specific skills, experience and
> interests to increase diversity and add value to particular
> initiatives. Members at large will be selected based on their ability
> to add expertise and perspectives related to specific food sectors,
> initiatives, geographies (e.g. inner city, links to rural Manitoba) or
> demographics (e.g. industry, food bank, businesses, education, social
> enterprise, associations, food waste management, etc.)".

Winnipeg's approach is among the most detailed and specific with respect
to membership composition. A more common approach is to list general
sectors that are ideally represented. For example, the Edmonton Food
Council requires that its "\[m\]embership reflects diverse interests
from across the entire food system" and provides a detailed list and
description of sectors including production, processing, distribution,
buying and selling, eating and celebrating, waste and recovery,
education, governance, development and building industry, citizens and
eaters, and demographic groups .

Some FPCs also include specific qualifications that members ought to
possess, such as leadership abilities, professional or community
experience in the field, expertise in the sector, and capacity to
network and build relationships. For example, the Winnipeg Food Council
specifies that membership should contain a variety of qualifications
such as "\[p\]rofessional or community work that reflects their interest
in municipal food issues,"\[s\]kills and experience in specific areas
(such as community food security, project evaluation and strategic
planning) that allow them to contribute to policy development and
influence change," and the "\[a\]bility to help the Winnipeg Food
Council establish and build relationships and partnerships with specific
sectors, networks, and demographics". Strict membership criteria can be
helpful in establishing consistency and transparency but inflexibility
may also raise barriers regarding diversity and inclusion. More informal
selection criteria offer flexibility but can create uncertainty and may
lead to unexpected power imbalances.

#### Membership Capacity

A significant issue is whether sectoral representatives will sit in
their personal or organizational capacities. Some FPCs require that
members *not* sit as representatives of their organizations, others
stipulate that members may or must be a part of and represent their
organizations, and some have a mix. The Greater Sudbury Food Policy
Council specifies that "\[v\]oting members will be selected based on the
strength of their personal qualifications and will not act as
representatives of a specific sponsoring organization. They will
represent the rich diversity of Greater Sudbury" (however, resource
members who are non-voting members represent a specific agency or the
government). The Kamloops Food Policy Council contains a mix of
representation, stating that "\[m\]embership is open to individuals,
businesses, organizations, any level and sector of government (local,
indigenous, provincial, federal), and institutions, agencies,
authorities, and Crown corporations." The Chatham-Kent Food Policy
Council requires members to represent their organizations and states
that members will cease to be members if they "\[r\]esign from their
position with the agency, organization, coalition, or business they
represent as a member of the FPC."

If members sit in an organizational capacity, they may be more likely to
put the interests of that body ahead of the shared interest of the
group. Organizational representatives may have more power than
individuals, perpetuating or creating power imbalances and potential for
manipulation. However, organizational representatives may bring
resources and networking abilities that can be limited without having
established a more formal role for organizational members.

#### Residency Requirements

Residency within a specific locality or region may be a prerequisite for
membership on an FPC. For example, the Vancouver Food Policy Council
states that members must "\[l\]ive or work in Vancouver, or have a
significant body of experience with issues in Vancouver". The Middlesex
London Food Policy Council requires that "\[m\]embers must live or work
in London or Middlesex County." Local membership can contribute an
intimate knowledge of place, but can limit diversity and the
perspectives of those who are active in the broader food
system---including farmers who might live outside the bounds of urban
centers where political institutions and governing bodies are generally
based. Residency requirements may also impact whether members sit in
their personal or organizational capacity, as organizations may have a
broader geographical scope.

#### Consensus on Values

Some FPCs require their members to endorse the mission, goals, and
values of the body. Members of the Middlesex London Food Policy Council,
for example, "must endorse the mission, goals, and values of the
Council." A well-defined common goal is good for internal and external
trust-building. It can establish a coherent narrative and be important
for momentum in the early days of formation, especially when searching
for funding. One downside is that such consensus may be difficult to
achieve at first if the body itself is responsible for establishing its
values and this requirement may risk suppressing dissenting voices that
are important for inclusion.

## Supporting Equity, Diversity, Inclusion and Accessibility

A council may have broad representation in sectoral terms from across
the regional food system but still lack the necessary representation
of--and allocation of decision-making power to--communities that
comprise that system. Research has show that low-income and racialized
groups are disproportionately impacted by food system failures ([Harper
et al. 2009, 11](#ref-harper2009food)). Their voices and experiences
should therefore have proportionate influence on governance. Every
community will have a unique set of histories, relationships, and needs
that governance bodies must address through a place-based approach
([Franzen-Castle et al. 2021, 32](#ref-franzen2021engaging)). Community
participation can shift decision-making from a centralized or highly
specialized process to a more localized and democratic one by lifting up
voices that are too often pushed to the margins ([Franzen-Castle et al.
2021, 33](#ref-franzen2021engaging)). Equtiable, diverse, inclusive and
accessible participation enhances collective problem-solving and
legitimizes decision-making.

### Key Lessons From Research

1.  Equitable, diverse, inclusive and accessible participation from
    individuals and communities in the region is a significant strength
    addressing in complex food governance.

2.  Local knowledge and lived experience complement sectoral-based
    knowledge.

3.  Barriers to inclusion must be named and identified, but they must
    also be actively addressed.

4.  Diverse representation should be present at every stage of
    decision-making.

5.  Recruitment of members should be transparent and value-driven.

A wide range of experiences and perspectives opens up unique
opportunities for a creative approach to food systems issues ([Borron
2003, 4](#ref-borron2003food)). Members with lived experience offer
essential insights into how polices should be designed and how they will
play out on-the-ground, giving voice to those who feel the policy
impacts most directly ([Boden and Hoover 2018, 46](#ref-boden2018food)).
Local knowledge offers an experiential perspective to complement the
perspectives of technical experts, rounding out and enhancing the
effectiveness of decision-making ([Bassarab et al. 2019,
40](#ref-bassarab2019finding)). Significant time may need to be spent in
the early days of an FPC to establish common goals and a clear vision,
define terms, and build clear paths for communication and dispute
resolution ([Borron 2003, 5](#ref-borron2003food)). The council should
also define *who* they mean by "community members"---e.g., from specific
marginalized, low-income or racialized communities---and *how* they plan
to include these members in the decision-making process to ensure
equitable participation and power ([Bassarab et al. 2019,
40](#ref-bassarab2019finding)).

Community members may face barriers to participation such as schedule
and timing conflicts (especially if time off work is needed)
([Franzen-Castle et al. 2021, 220](#ref-franzen2021engaging); [Coplen
and Cuneo 2015, 100](#ref-coplen2015dissolved)), transportation
challenges ([Franzen-Castle et al. 2021,
220](#ref-franzen2021engaging)), language barriers ([Coplen and Cuneo
2015, 101](#ref-coplen2015dissolved)), and feelings of being unqualified
to attend ([Franzen-Castle et al. 2021, 221](#ref-franzen2021engaging)).
Marginalized communities and youth often lack representation, and FPCs
must build targeted opportunities for such groups into their structure
if they want to encourage participation ([Harper et al. 2009,
37](#ref-harper2009food)). In the early days of FPC planning, time will
need to be invested into building understandings about the communities
being serve; providing education on the food system and cultural
competency skills; creating space for various methods of communication,
such as storytelling, written communication, and presentations; and
building relationships between council members ([McCullagh 2012,
80](#ref-mccullagh2012food)). Training may be required to assist
community members to take on leadership roles and develop important
technical and soft skills for collaboration ([La Forge 2017,
21](#ref-la2017joined)).

Diversity is important at all stages of FPC work, from shaping structure
and priorities to implementing and evaluating projects ([McCullagh 2012,
81](#ref-mccullagh2012food)). Building trust between diverse members can
consume a substantial amount of time and resources in the early days of
a council, which is why effective leadership is crucial from the start
([Harper et al. 2009, 37](#ref-harper2009food)). The process for
membership recruitment and selection should be open and transparent,
driven by clear guidelines of what diversity means to the council
([Coplen and Cuneo 2015, 105](#ref-coplen2015dissolved)). Diversity will
be limited if FPCs choose members exclusively from those actively
involved in food issues ([McCullagh 2012, 78](#ref-mccullagh2012food))
or from food system professionals (e.g. people working in urban farming,
food access, and food policy) ([Boden and Hoover 2018,
44](#ref-boden2018food)).

Selection criteria for diversity can be formal---e.g. designating a
specific number of seats for specific community members or
representatives---which present a clear and consistent process but can
suffer from being inflexible ([Schiff 2007, 320](#ref-schiff2007food))
or more informal---e.g. having a mandate that promises to be inclusive
of a broad range of enumerated groups---which may be more flexible, but
can create confusion and unpredictability ([Schiff 2007,
321](#ref-schiff2007food)). Putting out open calls for members (on
social media or through word of mouth) can confine recruitment to
established networks and reduce diversity ([C. Porter 2018,
10](#ref-porter2018food)). Rather, purposive strategies that aim to
recruit from diverse networks---e.g. targeted recruitment campaigns and
specific diversity quotas---may be more successful ([C. Porter 2018,
10](#ref-porter2018food); [Boden and Hoover 2018,
48](#ref-boden2018food)). Establishing a truly inclusive council
requires active engagement, proactive planning and internal policies to
ensure equal representation and power-sharing.

### Recommendations for Implementation

#### Membership Composition

Our findings indicate that FPCs addressed the challenge of creating a
diverse, inclusive and accessible membership using a range of
strategies. On the whole, we observed that specific rules and policies
around the diversity of membership tended to be vague---both in terms of
how diversity, inclusion and/or accessibility are defined and what means
were available for implementation. Commitments tended to be aspirational
rather than concrete. For example, the St. John's Food Policy Council
specifies that "\[t\]he Council aims to consist of members from a
variety of backgrounds, reflecting the diversity of our community and
the food system." A few framed diversity through qualifications or
expertise, some of which were broad. The Winnipeg Food Council specifies
that the body will contain "citizens at large with specific skills,
experience and interests to increase diversity and add value to
particular initiatives" and another, the Kelowna Agricultural Advisory
Committee, was highly technical, looking for people with the "ability to
objectively review complex applications and planning
considerations"---creating obvious barriers to some applicants. By
comparison, the Chatham-Kent Food Policy Council designated seats for
specific diversity groups, such as an organizations representing
seniors, youth and immigration, and employment and social services.

When allocating specific seats to address diversity, inclusion and
accessibility, some FPCs require that designated seats remain empty if
not filled while others allow alternative members with the most relevant
qualifications to fill those seats. For example, the Niagara
Agricultural Policy and Action Committee states that "\[a\]ll attempts
will be made to stay within the guideline composition; however, if the
applications received or the qualifications of applications do not fully
address the guideline composition criteria, the most capable and
qualified applicants will be recommended for appointment to fulfill the
membership composition." Specifying designated seats by defining the
group and number of seats can help ensure that membership composition
sufficiently captures a range of knowledge and experience, especially
for targeted under-served groups.

#### Member Recruitment and Selection

FPCs use a variety of methods for recruiting new members. For example,
the Greater Sudbury has a Membership Working Group to identify and
recommend new members, the Chatham-Kent Food Policy Council has a
government-appointed nomination committee to identify and recommend new
members, the Hamilton Food Advisory Committee uses a standardized
municipal application process for Advisory Committees because it is an
internal structure, the Edmonton Food Council uses an open call to the
public, and the Niagara Agricultural Policy and Action Committee seeks
new members by invitation. As we would expect, internal FPCs are more
likely to have at least some members nominated or appointed by local
government. Recruiting from a broad and open network may reach a more
diverse base, but utilizing established networks may be more efficient.
Having a working group determine the best method for recruitment and
advertising towards targeted groups can be useful when guided by both
values and experience.

#### Meeting Scheduling

Some FPCs specify meeting schedules, such as the Halton Agricultural
Advisory Committee, which states that "\[t\]he Committee shall normally
meet on the first Tuesday of each month." Others are more flexible,
employing statements like that of the Edmonton Food
Council--"\[m\]eeting schedules and locations will be determined in
accordance with the availability of the membership"--or the Greater
Sudbury Food Policy Council--"time is determined by consensus".
Scheduling is important because an inability to attend specific times
and dates may be a barrier to participation that disproportionately
affects individuals or organizations with less flexible schedules or
fewer resources. Having members collectively choose the meeting times,
dates, and location--rather than specifying these in terms of
reference--is one way to accommodate more members.

#### Membership Reimbursement and Dues

No FPCs in our sample provide reimbursement for participation. However,
the Halton Agricultural Advisory Committee provides reimbursement for
travel expenses, which could increase accessibility for those who may
need to travel further to participate. The Durham Food Policy Council
requires members to pay dues, which could limit the ability of certain
individuals to participate.

#### Membership Term

Membership terms are generally limited by time (e.g. 1-4 years) with
possibility for renewal and make provision for termination upon death,
resignation, or when the council is dissolved. Terms limits can also be
mixed with a maximum term---e.g. mixed terms of one, two, or three years
with a nine year maximum for any individual member. Term length can
promote new members joining, increasing diversity and responding to
evolving community identities. However, this must be balanced with the
need for stable and consistent membership, sharing knowledge, and
promoting mentorship. Mixed terms can help to preserve member continuity
and provide mentorship while bringing in new perspectives. If members
miss consecutive meetings (generally 2-3) without approval or
communication they are generally deemed to have resigned. This is
important for incentivizing engagement and commitment, but the policies
around communicating a leave should be clear and accessible.

#### Explicit Commitments

Few of the FPCs founding documents in our sample included explicit
statements about diversity. The St. John's Food Policy Council is an
exception, starting that it "is committed to supporting equity,
diversity, inclusion and the dignity of all people" but most have only
implied statements through committing to diverse membership. Explicit
commitments can help reinforce values and may promote some
accountability for councils to uphold these values, but they are
insufficient as standalone policies without accounting for the
considerations discussed above.

## Responding to Inequities in Power

Membership structures in collaborative governance can create---or
perpetuate---power imbalances. Effective and sustainable governance
requires that power in decision-making be shared equitably amongst
members ([Bassarab et al. 2019, 40](#ref-bassarab2019finding)).
Establishing mechanisms that recognize power discrepancies between
members and work to distribute that power appropriately can enhance food
democracy and citizen participation. A balanced and equitable council
will be better suited to tackle complex problems collectively without
perpetuating asymmetrical power imbalances, which in turn can help
legitimize the council, establishing trust and building relationships
with the broader community.

### Key Lessons From Research

1.  Trust and interdependence enable power sharing toward common goals.

2.  Roles and responsibilities should be clearly defined.

3.  Accountability mechanisms can help to address asymmetric power
    relations.

Diverse representation alone does not necessarily mean that those voices
are equally influential in directing FPC objectives ([Bassarab et al.
2019, 34](#ref-bassarab2019finding)). Some FPC members will have more
power (social, economic, political, etc.) than others. Organizational
structure can impact who sits on the council and the power between
members, but membership composition and relationship to government may
have even more impact on policy priorities ([Bassarab et al. 2019,
39](#ref-bassarab2019finding)). To avoid further entrenching
asymmetrical power imbalances, it is important to create mechanisms that
recognize and address these dynamics. Top-down control is not ideal for
FPCs; a multi-functional approach with decentralized power at the bottom
tends to be more successful ([La Forge 2017, 52](#ref-la2017joined)).
Decentralizing power promotes a "bottom-up" approach to decision-making,
where those with less power but who often have more dedication and
capacity to respond to local issues are given autonomy and control ([La
Forge 2017, 24](#ref-la2017joined)). Including public participants in
working groups can further decentralize control at the bottom ([La Forge
2017, 69](#ref-la2017joined)), but local government officials must be
willing to participate in collaborative governance and power-sharing
with citizens if the FPC is to be effective ([Bassarab et al. 2019,
40](#ref-bassarab2019finding)).

Building relationships grounded in trust and driven by a deliberative
and strategic focus on collaboration is a key element in effective and
long-lasting FPCs ([La Forge 2017, 21](#ref-la2017joined)). A lack of
clarity on the role of the FPC in addressing food issues and ill-defined
roles (i.e. who does what) and objectives can create conflict ([Arko
2014, 47](#ref-arko2014lead); [Schiff 2008, 226](#ref-schiff2008role);
[Harper et al. 2009, 7](#ref-harper2009food); [Cornog 2009,
49](#ref-cornog2009institutionalizing)). Establishing clear objectives,
ensuring all members understand the shared mission, and laying out the
role and capacity of the FPC to address food issues can help keep
private interests from usurping common goals ([La Forge 2017,
21](#ref-la2017joined); [Harper et al. 2009, 7](#ref-harper2009food);
[Koski et al. 2018, 367](#ref-koski2018representation)). Member
selection processes (open or closed networks, or targeted) and
authoritative capacity also impact power dynamics. For example,
recruiting members through a self-selection process of existing networks
may exclude certain underrepresented external groups and compound
inequity ([Bassarab et al. 2019, 40](#ref-bassarab2019finding)).
Internal councils, or where membership is appointed, may be more
susceptible to power imbalances as certain interests and priorities are
more likely to be represented.

Accountability mechanisms are tools that can keep members in line with
council objectives and promote responsibility ([La Forge 2017,
26](#ref-la2017joined)). Along with establishing a well-defined common
objective and clear roles and responsibilities, other mechanisms include
creating "relational contracts" that incentivize members to act in the
collective interest; consistent process and impact evaluations; a review
and modification process; working group oversight and reporting;
external review or oversight; shared-budgets; and transparency with the
public ([La Forge 2017, 54--58](#ref-la2017joined)). Established
decision-making processes will also impact power dynamics. A
consensus-oriented approach may offer greater equality, but will
generally take more time and resources compared to a simple majority
([Harper et al. 2009, 38](#ref-harper2009food)). Formally establishing
these or other such mechanisms through written agreements embeds
accountability within the FPC structure, incentivizing members to act
accordingly.

### Recommendations for Implementation

#### Roles and Responsibilities

Some, but not all, FPCs in our sample lay out roles and responsibilities
or expectations of members. Some are specific, and outline what is
expected of a Director, the members and so on. The Middlesex London Food
Policy Council states that duties of the Chair include to "\[a\]ttend
and chair Executive meeting," "\[p\]review and review meeting agendas,"
and "\[g\]uide goal setting and program planning amongst MLFPC members".
Others, such as the Edmonton Food Council, are broader, stating that
members are expected to "demonstrate a respect for governance and
protocol" and "be transparent and declare conflicts of interest".
Defining roles and responsibilities early on is important for setting
member expectations. Some FPCs also define their values or broad goals.
These provisions not only help orient members and establish common goals
and shared values, but can be important tools to point to if members
veer from their roles in pursuit of self-interest. At least one
council--the Durham Food Policy Council--has a provision that allows for
member suspension or expulsion if they contravene rules or for other
reasons determined by a designated committee.

#### Leadership

Strong and sustainable leadership is closely related to how key
leadership positions---such as the Chair of an FPC---are filled. In our
sample, there appeared to be a stronger tendency for some internal FPCs,
such as the Winnipeg Food Council and the Chatham-Kent Food Policy
Council, to have the chair position appointed directly by government. In
contrast, most external FPCs (and some internal ones) ensure that the
Chair is an elected position and therefore directly accountable to the
membership. On the other hand, appointment of some key leadership
positions may have advantages such as ensuring equity and diversity in
the body's leadership.

#### Decision-Making Procedures

It should be clear which members have voting rights, how many votes it
takes to finalize a decision and the process for voting---i.e. in
person, in writing, etc. Some FPCs make explicit room for non-voting
members, such as the Vancouver Food Policy Council, which includes two
non-voting council liaisons, one non-voting Park Board Commission
liaison, and two non-voting staff liaisons, who act as liaisons between
the council and regional government, and the Greater Sudbury Food Policy
Council, which contains various non-voting Resource Members, who are
"\[a\] member of the GSFPC who is assigned by a governmental department
or an agency on a temporary or ongoing basis to support the work of the
GSFPC and who are representing their agency or the government food
system perspective." Non-voting members are a good way to maintain
connections and access supports without giving up direct decision-making
power.

In our sample, voting rules varied considerably. Some examples include:
simple majority; majority and must include at least one representative
from each sector and/or a member at large; 20% of voting members or
50% + 1 for day-to-day decisions but two-thirds for major decisions; and
consensus.

There seems to be a slight preference for consensus in decision-making
in external FPCs. When a consensus is not possible, there is generally
an option for quorum voting instead, though the Hamilton Food Advisory
Committee required consensus for all formal decisions. The Kelowna
Agricultural Advisory Committee also included an explicit conflict of
interest rule, requiring that voting members with a direct or indirect
pecuniary interest in a matter disclose the conflict of interest;
disabling them from discussing or voting on the matter.

Requiring equal representation across the food system when voting,
larger agreement for fundamental decisions, or giving more votes to
certain members can help distribute power to a wider range of actors.
Consensus, or even a commitment to trying to reach consensus, can help
distribute power as it requires collaboration and concessions by all
members, but it can be very costly in both time and resources and runs
the risk of manipulation by more dominant members.

#### Training and Support for Members

Internal FPCs, such as the Kelowna Agricultural Advisory Committee, more
frequently provide training and staff support to members, stating that
"\[a\]ll committee members will be provided a training session by the
City on procedures for Committees of Council." Power is more easily
shared when all members are on an even playing field in terms of
knowledge or skills. Training and staff support of members can help try
to achieve this. It is important that members feel capable in their
position so that they are comfortable contributing and participating in
meetings, which can partially be achieved through providing training and
support to members.

## Building External Relationships

Though FPCs are focused at the local scale, they are nested within a
broad network of actors and organizations across multiple levels of
government and jurisdictions that influence food system trajectory.
There may be a dizzying array of goals and ideologies dispersed amongst
each node in the network, but it is nonetheless important to recognize
and work within this inter-connected political and socio-economic web.
Creating and maintaining strong relationships with a diverse network of
external (to the FPC) actors can expand the reach of local priorities
and open up opportunities for enhanced knowledge and resource sharing
([La Forge 2017, 59](#ref-la2017joined)). Multi-scalar support and
collaboration can promote structurally strong and long-lasting councils.

### Key Lessons From Research

1.  External relationships span government, non-government, and private
    actors.

2.  Local FPCs are nested within multi-scalar jurisdictions and depend
    on multi-scalar relationships.

3.  Costs and benefits of external partnerships vary depending on
    organizational structure.

While the impacts of food policy are mainly felt locally, problems in
the food system are complex, requiring a diverse range of knowledge and
experiences to solve them ([Clark 2021, 200](#ref-clark2021public)).
Collaboration is not only a key element *within* a council but also
*between* them and external organizations and actors ([La Forge 2017,
71](#ref-la2017joined)). Multi-scalar and cross-sectoral collaboration
is recommended as a way to share information, expand resource streams,
advocate at higher levels and coordinate efforts ([La Forge 2017, 59,
60](#ref-la2017joined)). Local FPCs may influence broader food policy
change as they can act as "test-sites" for innovative and experimental
local projects ([La Forge 2017, 59](#ref-la2017joined)). However, local
contributions should not be wholly responsible for filling the policy
gap. Strong external relationships---especially with higher-level
agencies---are important to ensure contributions are sustainable over
time ([La Forge 2017, 60](#ref-la2017joined)).

External actors can participate in FPC efforts through sub-committees,
consultation, or advisory capacities without extending voting or
decision-making powers ([Schiff 2007, 323](#ref-schiff2007food)).
Partnerships between FPCs and external actors can vary, providing
different levels and kinds of support. For example, policy experts or
academics can help identify issues that can be addressed through policy
and which issues may cause tension with the public while local food
organizations can help set priorities and coordinate regional efforts
([Clayton et al. 2015, 12](#ref-clayton2015role)). An external
consultant can be used to provide an independent and impartial view of a
food systems issue ([Yeatman 1994, 22](#ref-yeatman1994food)) External
relationships can potentially influence priority setting and where
funding is spent ([Bassarab et al. 2019, 37](#ref-bassarab2019finding)).
Roles and responsibilities within relationships should be clearly
defined from the outset to avoid shifting priorities away from the goals
of the FPC ([Coplen and Cuneo 2015, 104](#ref-coplen2015dissolved)).

A key relationship to consider is with government, especially for
external structures. Collaboration and creating strong links across
multiple levels is generally thought to be beneficial ([Harper et al.
2009, 7](#ref-harper2009food); [La Forge 2017, 21](#ref-la2017joined);
[Prové, de Krom, and Dessein 2019, 179](#ref-prove2019politics)).
Government can be influential in getting FPC priorities more political
coverage and opens up possible multi-level governmental funding ([La
Forge 2017, 62](#ref-la2017joined)). While government relationships do
not necessarily impact council robustness ([Rollins 2012,
35](#ref-rollins2012food)), they can help to promote council continuity
and sustainability over time ([Yeatman 1994, 20](#ref-yeatman1994food)).
Councils directly embedded in government have---unsurprisingly---the
closest links to government ([Di Giulio 2017,
55](#ref-digiulio2017food)) and have slightly more success creating
local infrastructure change ([Di Giulio 2017,
88](#ref-digiulio2017food)). Direct governmental links can make advocacy
for policy change easier ([Schiff 2007, 315](#ref-schiff2007food)). FPCs
that are a part of government are more likely to engage in a diverse
demographic of individuals and have seats reserved for diverse sector
representatives ([C. A. Porter and Ashcraft 2020,
10](#ref-porter2020new)). Whether an FPC is embedded in government, a
non-profit, or grassroots initiative does not appear to affect
collaboration with other FPCs or political or civic engagement ([Di
Giulio 2017, 56--58](#ref-digiulio2017food)). There is generally a
tension between being embedded within government---which provides access
to stable resources and authoritative capacity---and being independent
from government---allowing FPCs to be more critical of existing
governmental policies ([Harper et al. 2009, 4](#ref-harper2009food);
[Fox 2010, 3](#ref-fox2010food); [Schiff 2008,
226](#ref-schiff2008role)).

### Recommendations for Implementation

#### Partnerships as Explicit Goals

Most FPCs, both internal and external, have *fostering relationships
through collaboration across the food system* as one of their
objectives. However, external FPCs often have this objective as part of
a broader goal of networking and collaboration between a wide range of
actors, while internal bodies generally have more direct mandates over
government networking such as advising specific departments or sharing
resources. For example, part of the objective of the Squamish Food
Policy Council, an external FPC, is to "\[a\]ctively foster partnerships
with other agencies working on food and agriculture initiatives" and
"\[p\]articipate in regional, provincial and national initiatives and
conversations that impact our local food system." One of the objectives
of the Hamilton Food Advisory Committee, an internal FPC, is to
"\[f\]acilitate connections and share information and resources between
members, the Board of Health, City staff, and as appropriate, further
disseminate these lessons and resources among community organizations,
businesses, citizens, and other groups that have an impact on community
food security." Developing relationships with various food system
stakeholders can increase knowledge and resources sharing for tackling
complex issues, but can also be time consuming and emotionally and
financially difficult to maintain.

#### Government Membership

Internal FPCs are much more likely to explicitly state their desired
number of members from government, but the membership positions are
often (though not always) non-voting. Having non-voting members can be a
good way to maintain connections to government and resources without
giving up the power of a vote to a political member. Internal FPCs are
much more likely to explicitly have an advisory role to the regional
government. For example, the objectives of the Edmonton Food Council
include "providing advice to the City and other key stakeholders" and
the objectives of the Halton Agricultural Advisory committee include to
"\[a\]dvise and assist the Region in the implementation of Halton's
agricultural goals, objectives and policies." A direct relationship with
government can lend consistent resources and potentially get matters
more air time, but can suffer from being beholden to particular projects
and objectives. On the other hand, non-governmental relationships offer
a wide range of perspectives and expertise, leaving room for
governmental criticism, but do not necessarily provide consistent
funding/resources.

#### Facilitating Connections

External FPCs are more likely to require members to help facilitate
dialogue and partnerships with external organizations and communities.
For example, desired membership skills for the Greater Sudbury Food
Policy Council, an external council, includes that "\[members\] can help
the GSFPC to have dialogue and partnerships with at least one distinct
population or sector group in the City of Greater Sudbury or regional
food system." Perhaps this is because internal FPCs are able to leverage
pre-existing government connections to external organizations, so they
are less likely to rely on members to facilitate external connections.
Internal FPCs are more likely to have support staff provided by local
government. For example, for the Winnipeg Food Council, "\[the\]
Winnipeg Public Service will provide the Winnipeg Food Council
Coordinator, who will support the Winnipeg Food Council and liaise with
the Public Service as needed" and "\[s\]taffing support from Winnipeg's
Urban Planning Division will be assigned as needed to support the
Winnipeg Food Council." Support staff provide consistent and robust
support with insight into navigating complex political environments. The
Chair/Co-Chairs of both internal and external bodies are important for
facilitating connections. The Chairs/Co-Chairs often act as spokespeople
for the FPC, such as the Middlesex London Food Policy Council, in which
the Chair's duties include to "\[a\]ct as the spokesperson for MLFPC."
The Chair/Co-Chairs are also often responsible for facilitating guest
speakers, such as the Chatham-Kent FPC, where the Chair is responsible
to "invite guests as required." Thus, strong leadership in the
Chair/Co-Chair position is important for ensuring the FPC is able to
build the necessary connections to government and external organizations
for optimal functioning.

## Promoting Public Participation and Transparency

Democratic decision-making at the local scale is enhanced when there is
public trust and support of the governing body. The local nature and
decentralized approach of many FPCs means that open communication and
engagement with the broader public should be a priority. Transparency in
the goals and capacities of the council along with how members are
selected and how decisions are made is important for building public
trust and holding the council accountable. Public engagement enhances
democratic decision-making and signals that the goals and values of the
community will not be usurped by the interests of the council members
without careful consideration.

### Key Lessons From Research

1.  Public engagement strategies should prioritize accessibility and
    consistency.

2.  FPC priorities can shape public willingness to engage.

FPCs should nurture community connections, regularly ask for public
input, and ensure meetings are accessible to as many stakeholders as
possible ([Coplen and Cuneo 2015, 105](#ref-coplen2015dissolved)), as
democracy is enhanced when the public is more actively engaged in
governance ([La Forge 2017, 27](#ref-la2017joined)). Creating a link
between the public and an FPC extends information sharing beyond
internal and external relationships to the community at large ([La Forge
2017, 49](#ref-la2017joined)). This enables the public to engage with
the decision-makers and ensure that issues being addressed are current
and relevant to the local community.

To improve participation from diverse members of the public, FPCs should
have adaptable public engagement strategies targeted at
under-represented groups ([C. Porter 2018, 157](#ref-porter2018food)).
Strategies may include encouraging leadership, ensuring adequate
organizational capacity and funding, and enhancing accessibility through
providing services such as transportation, childcare, and language
translation ([C. Porter 2018, 158](#ref-porter2018food)). Overly
technical or authoritative language and spaces can create an
exclusionary effect on many members of the community. It is important to
use an open and inclusive approach to public engagement to encourage a
diverse spectrum of participation ([Coplen and Cuneo 2015,
95](#ref-coplen2015dissolved)). Accountability and transparency
mechanisms---i.e. clear policies about how decisions are made, how
members are selected, etc.---can play an active role in enhancing public
trust ([Coplen and Cuneo 2015, 105](#ref-coplen2015dissolved)).

Priorities of the FPC can shape public participation. Procedural
justice---how decisions are made and resources allocated---as a core
objective means that issues most important to the public will be the
ones addressed in the work of the FPC ([Prové, de Krom, and Dessein
2019, 179](#ref-prove2019politics)). An emphasis on food justice is more
likely to engage a diverse demographic of individuals ([C. A. Porter and
Ashcraft 2020, 10](#ref-porter2020new)). FPCs can also hold an
educational role within communities ([Schiff 2008,
226](#ref-schiff2008role)) and should include educational elements for
the public within their work ([Harper et al. 2009,
7](#ref-harper2009food)). Members of the public should have the
opportunity to participate in subcommittees and as informal meeting
participants ([Schiff 2007, 326](#ref-schiff2007food)), further
decentralizing power and enhancing democracy ([La Forge 2017,
69](#ref-la2017joined)).

### Recommendations for Implementation

#### Transparency

Our data suggest that internal FPCs may have stronger transparency
mechanisms---perhaps tied to legal rules, such as open meeting
requirements---that bind local government bodies. Almost all internal
FPCs in our sample, such as the Halton Agricultural Advisory Committee
and the Vancouver Food Policy Council, explicitly state that meetings
are open to the public, generally with a mechanism that allows citizens
to address the council. By comparison, only a few external councils make
their meetings open to the public. Both types of bodies tend to have
statements specifying what is to be recorded in meeting minutes and how,
but internal bodies are also more likely to publish their minutes
publicly. Having meetings open to the public promotes accountability and
transparency in both the decision-making process and outcomes, and
provides a vehicle for community input. Many FPCs also require that
planning, outcome, and financial reports be made publicly available each
year. Annual reporting, especially in terms of where funding comes from
and how it is allocated, is crucial for transparency and maintaining
public trust.

#### Participation

Internal FPCs, such as the Chatham-Kent Food Policy Council and the
Winnipeg Food Council, have a tendency to use working groups in which
members of the public can participate. Working groups are a way for the
public to directly contribute to the work of the FPC, increasing the
democratic nature of the process. However, working groups can take time
and energy to facilitate and it may be difficult to keep public
volunteers engaged for extended periods. Some FPCs also have
communication and education with the broader community as a goal, and/or
being open and accountable to citizens and transparency as a value. For
example, one of the objectives of the Squamish Food Policy Council is to
"\[e\]ngage in community outreach to advance public education on food
literacy, agricultural skills, and traditional food ways, and to
encourage public participation." Under their values, the Middlesex
London Food Policy Council identifies transparency as an important value
and states that "\[people\] have a right to know what's in their food,
where and how it is produced and what is being discussed within the Food
Policy Council." These goals and values can help encourage public
participation and hold the council accountable if they fail to
adequately engage with the public.

#### Communication with the Public

The most common method of communication with the public is through the
Chair/Vice-Chair for both internal and external councils. The Kamloops
Food Policy Council mentions the potential creation of a communications
Working Group, and the Greater Sudbury Food Policy Council requires
communications by working or task groups to be pre-approved by
members---some of which require a vote. A single or unitary voice
promotes consistency and can help build public trust. It is important to
choose a spokesperson that has strong leadership qualities and is
trusted by the community at large. Restricting public communications may
cause tension within the council if certain members want to be critical
of the council's decisions, so an internal mechanism for complaint could
provide an alternative to airing disagreements publicly, at least as a
first step.

#### Confidentiality

Internal bodies are more likely to have statements related to
confidentiality of information, though this is not common. The internal
FPCs with confidentiality statements include the Chatham-Kent Food
Policy Council, the Edmonton Food Council, and the Hamilton Food
Advisory Committee. Confidentiality is generally referred to in a
statement of ethics or code of conduct that members are to follow.
Confidentiality is important to protect sensitive matters, but it should
be clear what matters are confidential so members feel free to share
information with the public where appropriate.

## Fostering Opportunities for Adequate Resourcing

Strong regional governance requires consistency and sustainability over
time to adequately respond to evolving food systems issues. A crucial
part of FPC success is ensuring that there are adequate opportunities
for acquiring resources---including but not limited to financial and
human resources and time---to support current and future projects.
Diverse governance bodies face high resource burdens, especially in the
early days, of establishing themselves as an effective and collaborative
entity with conflicting pressures ([Borron 2003,
8](#ref-borron2003food)). In order to gain support from the public and
enhance the legitimacy of the body, an FPC needs to establish where
their resources will come from and how they will be allocated.

### Key Lessons From Research

1.  Limited access to consistent funding and resources is a persistant
    challenge.

2.  Organizational structure can impact funding opportunities.

3.  Paid staff members can alleviate burdens from volunteer members.

4.  Funding during the early stages of development is linked to more
    robust organizations over the long run.

Lack of---or inconsistent access to---funding and resources is a key
challenge for many FPCs ([Harper et al. 2009, 5](#ref-harper2009food);
[Borron 2003, 8](#ref-borron2003food)). Funding can come from multiple
levels of government and/or individual or private donors/foundations,
but some councils rely entirely on volunteers with no access to funding
at all ([Harper et al. 2009, 4](#ref-harper2009food)). Limited resources
can impact engagement in policy work ([Scherb et al. 2012,
12](#ref-scherb2012exploring)), effective public engagement ([C. Porter
2018, 156](#ref-porter2018food)), and overall productivity ([Cornog
2009, 50--51](#ref-cornog2009institutionalizing)). The organizational
structure can impact funding access---e.g. FPCs that are embedded within
a government, or have strong links, likely have more consistent access
to public funding compared to grassroots organizations, while
non-profits have strong connections to foundations and larger NGO
networks ([Harper et al. 2009, 29](#ref-harper2009food); [Borron 2003,
5](#ref-borron2003food)). Priorities of an FPC can also shape funding
opportunities. For example, federal funding in Canada has been directed
towards food security and health programming, limiting the ability of
FPCs to decide how to allocate these funds ([Schiff 2007,
83](#ref-schiff2007food)). Where funding comes from can also dictate
where the FPC is to allocate it, impacting autonomy and ability to
prioritize certain goals ([La Forge 2017, 46](#ref-la2017joined)). To
enhance control and flexibility over their own budget, councils should
aim for diverse political and internal support rather than being overly
dependent on one or a few individuals, organizations, or political
members ([Harper et al. 2009, 5--7](#ref-harper2009food)).

Council members commit a large quantity of personal time and resources
to an FPC and coordinating schedules amongst diverse members can create
barriers in engagement ([Coplen and Cuneo 2015,
93](#ref-coplen2015dissolved)). Assigning certain roles and
responsibilities to members without adequate support can overburden
them, weakening the capacity and longevity of the council. Where most
members are volunteers, having a few paid staff---even part-time---can
alleviate some burdens by taking on indispensable support roles like
administration, communications, education, networking, and building
external relationships ([Schiff 2007, 289](#ref-schiff2007food); [Borron
2003, 8](#ref-borron2003food)). Many FPCs stress the importance of
having at least one full-time staff member ([Schiff 2007,
298](#ref-schiff2007food)). Staff for FPCs require a range of skills
including leadership in a collaborative environment, organization,
communication with diverse stakeholders, event management, and the
ability to establish relationships with local food organizations and
businesses ([Schiff 2007, 326](#ref-schiff2007food); [Yeatman 1994,
21](#ref-yeatman1994food)). Securing consistent funding is a concern for
maintaining staff. Governments can supply relatively secure funding or
provide administrative and other resources, while grants through
non-profits or NGOs are generally short-lived, threatening the security
of staff ([Schiff 2007, 241](#ref-schiff2007food)).

More access to funding and time in the early stages of development can
lead to more robust FPCs ([Rollins 2012, 36](#ref-rollins2012food)).
Early on, FPCs often need to devote a substantial amount of time and
resources to establish a common ground, set priorities and build their
team ([Borron 2003, 8](#ref-borron2003food)). Starting with a small
project or initiative that will likely be successful may be a good way
to establish the council's credibility and gain support from funders
([Borron 2003, 8](#ref-borron2003food); [Harper et al. 2009,
7](#ref-harper2009food)). Establishing funding streams and other
resources before FPC formation may be critical in ensuring start-up
costs can be adequately met ([Schiff 2007, 338](#ref-schiff2007food)).

### Recommendations for Implementation

#### Access to Funding and Resources

While most of the documents in our data did not include funding details,
internal FPCs are more likely to receive a budget and resources such as
support staff from a related department of their regional government,
whereas external FPCs are more likely to utilize a wider range of
funding sources. For example, the Chatham-Kent Food Policy Council, an
internal FPC, has staff provided by the Public Health Unit to provide a
variety of supports including "providing background information,
resources, advice and support for implementation of priorities." The
Squamish Food Policy Council, an external FPC, states they receive
"financial support from a mix of sources." Some external bodies have an
action team, working group or committee dedicated to securing resources
through members, grants, and other avenues. For example, the Kamloops
Food Policy Council's Board of Directors may create a Finance Committee
as required. Several FPCs have broad statements about facilitating
relationships in order to share resources. Lack of funding is a major
challenge for FPCs and it is important to understand what resource
opportunities are available.

#### Support Staff

Internal FPCs are more likely to have support staff assigned by a
government department to manage administrative and other support tasks,
whereas external FPCs are more likely to choose from their members. For
example, for the Halton Agricultural Advisory Committee, an internal
FPC, Clerk's Staff prepares minutes and agendas, handles general
administrative tasks for meetings, retains Committee records, and
coordinates annual reports for the Committee, whereas the Middlesex
London Food Policy Council, an external FPC, elects both their Treasurer
and Secretary by vote from their membership. The Greater Sudbury Food
Policy Council has a "Resource Co-Chair" responsible for all
administrative tasks and to alleviate these burdens from the Chair. Paid
support staff provide consistent support over time and can be very
helpful to alleviate administrative and technical burdens from volunteer
members, strengthening the robustness of the council.

#### Time Commitments

On average for both internal and external FPCs, members are expected to
meet between 4-12 times per year and are able to miss 2-3 consecutive
meetings before they cease to be members. Some require members to commit
a certain amount of hours of work outside meetings for things like
working groups, answering emails, and reading and reviewing materials.
For example the Vancouver Food Policy Council states that "\[o\]utside
of meetings, members should expect to spend at least 2 hours on email
and other correspondence, report writing, and inspection rides.
Preparation time for all meetings is required." Time commitments and
required meeting attendance are incentives for volunteers to stay
engaged and get their assigned jobs done, but overly burdensome
requirements may deter participation.

## Embedding Adaptive Capacity

The complex and interconnected nature of food systems means that issues
are dynamic and constantly evolving. A governance structure should be
able to adapt and respond to internal and external changes in order to
stay relevant and focused on regional needs, but also must remain strong
and consistent ([La Forge 2017, 18](#ref-la2017joined)). Collaborative
arrangements are much more flexible and adaptable than centralized or
siloed approaches ([La Forge 2017, 17](#ref-la2017joined); [Schiff 2007,
120](#ref-schiff2007food)). Mechanisms that promote feedback, review and
adaptation of council processes will be better suited to tackle complex
food-systems issues and adapt appropriately over time.

### Key Lessons From Research

1.  Review and evaluation methods make it possible to adapt structure
    and processes as needed.

2.  A broad base of support from individuals and organizations increases
    adaptability.

3.  A strong focus on specific programs may detract from an ability to
    engage in other types of work.

Flexibility in the structure of an FPC can help to effectively respond
to complex and ever-changing food issues. An evaluation process to track
and review progress and outcomes along with mechanisms that permit the
council structure, members, or stakeholders to be adapted from time to
time can be beneficial ([Fox 2010, 4](#ref-fox2010food); [Harper et al.
2009, 7](#ref-harper2009food); [Coplen and Cuneo 2015,
104](#ref-coplen2015dissolved)). Adaptive management is "a tool that
proposes having a plan, assessing the outcomes of that plan, and
adjusting the plan accordingly" that can be used by FPCs to respond to
dynamic food systems problems ([La Forge 2017, 65](#ref-la2017joined)).
Councils must respond to not only changing norms and priorities in their
communities, but also incorporate lessons they learn from acting as a
collective entity themselves. For example, if the recruitment method
chosen by the council does not result in diverse membership, or member
turn-over is high, the council may want to amend their organizational
documents to account for these failures ([La Forge 2017,
66](#ref-la2017joined)). Having annual review reports, work plans,
subcomittees and public engagement opportunities provides flexibility
and opportunities to amend processes to better serve FPC priorities
([Schiff 2007, 306](#ref-schiff2007food)). While organizational
structure should be flexible, the processes and terms should be clear
and unambiguous to promote consistency and avoid confusion ([Schiff
2007, 339](#ref-schiff2007food)).

Another factor that increases the adaptive management capacity of an FPC
is having a broad base of support from a variety of individuals and
organizations. FPCs that are overly dependent on a single individual or
organization risk losing their management capacity in the event that
they lose support from the individual or organization they were
dependent on ([Harper et al. 2009, 39](#ref-harper2009food)). If an FPC
is embedded in a local government, it may be even more necessary to
establish a flexible structure, as to not fall into established---and
often rigid---governmental frameworks ([Schiff 2007,
334](#ref-schiff2007food)). FPCs also should be aware that a strong
focus on specific programs or policy initiatives could limit their
ability to manage other priorities and types of work ([Harper et al.
2009, 40](#ref-harper2009food)).

### Recommendations for Implementation

#### Review Mechanisms

Many FPCs have mechanisms that allow for review and amendment and they
vary in specificity. The Greater Sudbury Food Policy Council is quite
specific, stating "\[t\]his Terms of Reference shall be reviewed on an
annual basis for relevance and accuracy. Proposed future amendments to
the Terms of Reference shall be circulated at least 14 days prior to a
GSFPC meeting at which the amendments may be adopted by unanimous
consent of the GSFPC voting members (either present, attending by phone,
or voting by email or mail proxy)", while the Chatham-Kent Food Policy
Council simply reads "\[t\]he Terms of Reference shall be reviewed and
approved by CKFPC every two years". Internal FPCs frequently require
approval by their municipal council to change or amend their structure,
which could act as a barrier to the FPC implementing necessary changes
in their governance. Review is generally at a set time (e.g. end of
term, annually, etc.) to keep terms of reference and other
organizational documents up to date and relevant. Amendments can be made
by unanimous consent or majority of the voting members, and some
internal bodies require approval by their municipal council. Provisions
that require review and an amendment procedure are helpful in creating
flexibility and allows the body to evolve.

#### Conflict/Dispute Resolution

Some FPCs have methods for dealing with internal conflicts and disputes.
The Durham Food Policy Council included detailed provisions for a
dispute resolution mechanism, which encourages private resolution before
turning to mediation and then arbitration, with all costs born by
conflicting parties. Given the diversity and mixed interests of FPC
members, conflict is likely to arise. Having a dispute resolution
mechanism can be useful to guide members on how to best resolve
conflicts in an efficient and cost-effective way, which in turn can add
stability to the council over time. No internal or external FPCs we
reviewed have a mechanism for members to provide feedback. Having a
mechanism for members to provide feedback could be helpful to resolve
conflicts before they escalate.

#### Prioritization of Policy or Program Work

External FPCs are more likely to have both policy and program work as
part of their stated priorities, whereas internal FPCs are more likely
to prioritize policy work, usually in an advisory capacity to the local
government. Setting priorities and understanding a council's capacity to
effectively meet their objectives is important for managing expectations
and guiding council work, but flexibility to engage in both policy and
projects may be important depending on the trajectory of the council.
FPCs should ensure that if they are to engage in program work, they have
the capacity to continue to engage in other types of work as well.

#### Term Length

Term limits on membership can also increase adaptability. The ability
for new members to enter the FPC can help keep the governing body
relevant and respond to changing norms and values as new members seek
input. As noted above, there are clear trade-offs here with respect to
organizational stability and institutional knowledge.

# Appendix: Food Policy Council Dataset {#appendix-food-policy-council-dataset .unnumbered}

We consulted publicly available documents for each of the following food
policy councils in Canada as part of the empirical research component
for this study:

*Chatham-Kent Food Policy Council*

*Durham Food Policy Council*

*Edmonton Food Council*

*Greater Sudbury Food Policy Council*

*Halton Agricultural Advisory Committee*

*Hamilton Food Advisory Committee*

*Kamloops Food Policy Council*

*Kelowna Agricultural Advisory Committee*

*Middlesex London Food Policy Council*

*Niagara Policy and Action Committee*

*Squamish Food Policy Council*

*St. John's Food Policy Council*

*Vancouver Food Policy Council*

*Winnipeg Food Council*

# About the Authors {#about-the-authors .unnumbered}

**Anna Giddy:** Anna is a third-year law student at the Schulich School
of Law, Dalhousie University, where she researches in the areas of
regional food systems policy and collaborative local governance. She has
a diploma in plant science from the Dalhousie Agricultural Campus, a
diploma in viticulture and vineyard management from Niagara College and
studied law, justice and society at Dalhousie University. Anna hopes to
apply her experiences working in food and agriculture and her legal
education to help build and maintain a strong and collaborative food
system in Nova Scotia.

**Adrienne Klein:** Adrienne is a second-year law student at the
Schulich School of Law. She is passionate about food issues and believes
that law and policy can be used as an effective tool for creating a more
just and sustainable food system. She is particularly interested in
farmland protection and food sovereignty issues. In the future, she is
hoping that her legal degree will allow her to work in collaboration
with local agricultural communities and food groups to help develop a
strong a resilient food system where people are deeply connected to
where and how their food is grown.

**Jamie Baxter:** Jamie is an Associate Professor at the Schulich School
of Law where he works on issues in food, agriculture and local
government.

# Works Cited {#works-cited .unnumbered}

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-andree2020CivilSocietySocial" class="csl-entry">

Andrée, Peter, Jill K. Clark, Charles Z. Levkoe, and Kristen Lowitt,
eds. 2020. *Civil Society and Social Movements in Food System
Governance*. 1st ed. London: Routledge.

</div>

<div id="ref-arko2014lead" class="csl-entry">

Arko, Adria. 2014. "Lead Agencies of US Food Policy Councils." San Luis
Obispo, California: California Polytechnic State University.
<http://www.wpsanet.org/papers/docs/Arko%20WPSA%20Lead%20Agencies%20FPCs.pdf>.

</div>

<div id="ref-ArtsHalifax2017Report" class="csl-entry">

ArtsHalifax Advisory Committee. 2017. "A Report Making Recommendations
on the Structure of the Successor Committee." City of Halifax.

</div>

<div id="ref-bassarab2019finding" class="csl-entry">

Bassarab, Karen, Jill K. Clark, Raychel Santo, and Anne Palmer. 2019.
"Finding Our Way to Food Democracy: Lessons From US Food Policy Council
Governance." *Politics and Governance* 7 (4). Lisbon, Portugal:
Cogitatio Press: 32--47.
doi:[10.17645/pag.v7i4.2092](https://doi.org/10.17645/pag.v7i4.2092).

</div>

<div id="ref-baxter2019CitiesTimeUncertainty" class="csl-entry">

Baxter, Jamie, and Jessica Rose. 2019. "Cities in a Time of Uncertainty:
Food and Canadian Municipal Law." In *Food Law in Canada*, edited by
Heather McLeod-Kilmurray, Nathalie Chalifour, and Angela Lee. Markham:
Carswell.

</div>

<div id="ref-richardson2018federalism" class="csl-entry">

Berger Richardson, Sarah, and Nadia Lambek. 2018. "Federalism and
Fragmentation: Addressing the Possibilities of a Food Policy for
Canada." *Canadian Food Studies/La Revue Canadienne Des Études Sur
l'alimentation* 5 (3): 28--48.

</div>

<div id="ref-boden2018food" class="csl-entry">

Boden, Sam, and Brandon M. Hoover. 2018. "Food Policy Councils in the
Mid-Atlantic: Working Toward Justice." *Journal of Agriculture, Food
Systems, and Community Development* 8 (1): 39--52.
doi:[10.5304/jafscd.2018.081.002](https://doi.org/10.5304/jafscd.2018.081.002).

</div>

<div id="ref-borron2003food" class="csl-entry">

Borron, Sarah M. 2003. "Food Policy Councils: Practice and Possibility."
Eugene, Oregon: Congressional Hunger Center.

</div>

<div id="ref-calancie2018evaluating" class="csl-entry">

Calancie, Larissa, Nicole E. Allen, Shu Wen Ng, Bryan J. Weiner, Dianne
S. Ward, William B. Ware, and Alice S. Ammerman. 2018. "Evaluating Food
Policy Councils Using Structural Equation Modeling." *American Journal
of Community Psychology* 61 (1-2). Macon, United Kingdom: Blackwell
Science Ltd.: 251--64.
doi:<https://doi-org.ezproxy.library.dal.ca/10.1002/ajcp.12207>.

</div>

<div id="ref-clark2021public" class="csl-entry">

Clark, Jill K. 2021. "Public Values and Public Participation: A Case of
Collaborative Governance of a Planning Process." *The American Review of
Public Administration* 51 (3): 199--212.
doi:[10.1177/0275074020956397](https://doi.org/10.1177/0275074020956397).

</div>

<div id="ref-clayton2015role" class="csl-entry">

Clayton, Megan L., Shannon Frattaroli, Anne Palmer, and Keshia M.
Pollack. 2015. "The Role of Partnerships in U.S. Food Policy Council
Policy Activities." *PLoS ONE* 10 (4): e0122870.
doi:[10.1371/journal.pone.0122870](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0122870).

</div>

<div id="ref-coplen2015dissolved" class="csl-entry">

Coplen, Amy K, and Monica Cuneo. 2015. "Dissolved: Lessons Learned from
the Portland Multnomah Food Policy Council." *Journal of Agriculture,
Food Systems, and Community Development* 5 (2): 91--107.
doi:[10.5304/jafscd.2015.052.002](https://doi.org/10.5304/jafscd.2015.052.002).

</div>

<div id="ref-cornog2009institutionalizing" class="csl-entry">

Cornog, Megan Eleanor. 2009. "Institutionalizing Food Systems Planning:
The Role of Food Policy Councils." Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill.

</div>

<div id="ref-digiulio2017food" class="csl-entry">

Di Giulio, Laura A. 2017. "Food Policy Councils: Does Organizational
Type Matter." Columbus, Ohio: Ohio State University.
<http://rave.ohiolink.edu/etdc/view?acc_num=osu1492620713327182>.

</div>

<div id="ref-emerson2012IntegrativeFrameworkCollaborative"
class="csl-entry">

Emerson, Kirk, Tina Nabatchi, and Stephen Balogh. 2012. "An Integrative
Framework for Collaborative Governance." *Journal of Public
Administration Research and Theory* 22 (1): 1--29.
doi:[10.1093/jopart/mur011](https://doi.org/10.1093/jopart/mur011).

</div>

<div id="ref-fox2010food" class="csl-entry">

Fox, Clare. 2010. "Food Policy Councils: Innovations in Democratic
Governance for a Sustainable and Equitable Food System." Los Angeles:
UCLA Urban Planning Department.

</div>

<div id="ref-franzen2021engaging" class="csl-entry">

Franzen-Castle, Lisa, Daniel Remley, Lacey McCormack, Rose Adamski,
Rebecca Henne, Heather A Eicher-Miller, Donna J Mehrle, and Suzanne
Stluka. 2021. "Engaging Rural Community Members with Food Policy
Councils to Improve Food Access: Facilitators and Barriers." *Journal of
Hunger & Environmental Nutrition* 17 (2). Taylor & Francis: 207--23.
doi:[10.1080/19320248.2021.1997858](https://doi.org/10.1080/19320248.2021.1997858).

</div>

<div id="ref-PublicAppointmentPolicy" class="csl-entry">

Halifax Regional Municipality. 2018. "Public Appointment Policy."
Halifax. August 14.
<https://www.halifax.ca/city-hall/boards-committees-commissions/volunteer-boards-committees/public-appointment-policy>.

</div>

<div id="ref-AdministrativeOrderOne" class="csl-entry">

---------. 2022. *The Procedures of Council Administrative Order*.
*Administrative Order Number One*.

</div>

<div id="ref-harper2009food" class="csl-entry">

Harper, Alethea, Annie Shattuck, Eric Holt-Giménez, Alison Alkon, and
Frances Lambrick. 2009. "Food Policy Councils: Lessons Learned."
Oakland, California: Institute for Food and Development Policy.

</div>

<div id="ref-hrm2022BoardsCommitteesCommissions" class="csl-entry">

HRM. 2022. "Boards, Committees and Commissions." Halifax Regional
Municipality.
<https://www.halifax.ca/city-hall/boards-committees-commissions>.

</div>

<div id="ref-justfood2022SettingTableLocal" class="csl-entry">

JustFOOD. 2022. "Setting the Table: The Local Context." JustFOOD: Action
Plan for the Halifax Region.
<https://justfoodhalifax.ca/setting-the-table/>.

</div>

<div id="ref-koski2018representation" class="csl-entry">

Koski, Chris, Saba Siddiki, Abdul-Akeem Sadiq, and Julia Carboni. 2018.
"Representation in Collaborative Governance: A Case Study of a Food
Policy Council." *The American Review of Public Administration* 48 (4).
SAGE Publications Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA: 359--73.
doi:[10.1177/0275074016678683](https://doi.org/10.1177/0275074016678683).

</div>

<div id="ref-la2017joined" class="csl-entry">

La Forge, Sylvie. 2017. "Joined-up Governance of Agri-Food Systems in
Canada: An Examination of Food Policy Councils as a Form of Joined-up
Governance." Ottawa, Ontario: University of Ottawa.
<http://hdl.handle.net/10393/39676>.

</div>

<div id="ref-macrae2011JoinedUpFoodPolicy" class="csl-entry">

MacRae, Rod. 2011. "A Joined-Up Food Policy for Canada." *Journal of
Hunger & Environmental Nutrition* 6 (4): 424--57.
doi:[10.1080/19320248.2011.627297](https://doi.org/10.1080/19320248.2011.627297).

</div>

<div id="ref-macrae2013municipal" class="csl-entry">

MacRae, Rod, and Kendal Donahue. 2013. "Municipal Food Policy
Entrepreneurs: A Preliminary Analysis of How Canadian Cities and
Regional Districts Are Involved in Food System Change." Toronto Food
Policy Council, Vancouver Food Policy Council, Canadian Agriculture
Policy Institute.

</div>

<div id="ref-mah2013cultivating" class="csl-entry">

Mah, Catherine L, and Helen Thang. 2013. "Cultivating Food Connections:
The Toronto Food Strategy and Municipal Deliberation on Food."
*International Planning Studies* 18 (1). Taylor & Francis: 96--110.

</div>

<div id="ref-mccullagh2012food" class="csl-entry">

McCullagh, Molly. 2012. "Food Policy for All: Inclusion of Diverse
Community Residents on Food Policy Councils." Medford, Massachusetts:
Tufts University.

</div>

<div id="ref-2015MilanUrbanFood" class="csl-entry">

"Milan Urban Food Policy Pact." 2015. Milano.

</div>

<div id="ref-porter2018food" class="csl-entry">

Porter, Cathryn. 2018. "Food Democracy: Public Participation in New
England Food Policy Councils." Durham, New Hampshire: University of New
Hampshire. <https://scholars.unh.edu/thesis/1253>.

</div>

<div id="ref-porter2020new" class="csl-entry">

Porter, Cathryn A, and Catherine M Ashcraft. 2020. "New England Food
Policy Councils: An Assessment of Organizational Structure, Policy
Priorities and Public Participation." *Elementa: Science of the
Anthropocene* 8 (39). University of California Press.
doi:[10.1525/elementa.436](https://doi.org/10.1525/elementa.436).

</div>

<div id="ref-prove2019politics" class="csl-entry">

Prové, Charlotte, Michiel PMM de Krom, and Joost Dessein. 2019.
"Politics of Scale in Urban Agriculture Governance: A Transatlantic
Comparison of Food Policy Councils." *Journal of Rural Studies* 68.
Elsevier: 171--81.
doi:[10.1016/j.jrurstud.2019.01.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrurstud.2019.01.018).

</div>

<div id="ref-SocietyIncorporationOverview2019" class="csl-entry">

Registry of Joint Stock Companies. 2019. "Society Incorporation:
Overview and Instructions." Service Nova Scotia.

</div>

<div id="ref-rollins2012food" class="csl-entry">

Rollins, Mary F. 2012. "Food Security and Food Policy Councils in
Washington State: A Case for Coordination." Bothell, Washington:
University of Washington Bothell.

</div>

<div id="ref-scherb2012exploring" class="csl-entry">

Scherb, Allyson, Anne Palmer, Shannon Frattaroli, and Keshia Pollack.
2012. "Exploring Food System Policy: A Survey of Food Policy Councils in
the United States." *Journal of Agriculture, Food Systems, and Community
Development* 2 (4): 3--14.
doi:[10.5304/jafscd.2012.024.007](https://doi.org/10.5304/jafscd.2012.024.007).

</div>

<div id="ref-schiff2007food" class="csl-entry">

Schiff, Rebecca. 2007. "Food Policy Councils: An Examination of
Organisational Structure, Process, and Contribution to Alternative Food
Movements." Perth, Western Australia: Murdoch University.

</div>

<div id="ref-schiff2008role" class="csl-entry">

---------. 2008. "The Role of Food Policy Councils in Developing
Sustainable Food Systems." *Journal of Hunger & Environmental Nutrition*
3 (2-3): 206--28.
doi:[10.1080/19320240802244017](https://doi.org/10.1080/19320240802244017).

</div>

<div id="ref-yeatman1994food" class="csl-entry">

Yeatman, Heather. 1994. "Food Policy Councils in North America:
Observations and Insights." World Health Organization.

</div>

</div>